[Unknown]: IVM.
[Amit Varma]: So, let's look at history as a linear series of events, one thing following another, with
[Amit Varma]: everything seemingly inevitable.
[Amit Varma]: But that's the hindsight bias at play.
[Amit Varma]: When historical events are happening in the present tense, all possibilities seem open,
[Amit Varma]: everything seems chaotic, anything can happen.
[Amit Varma]: Also, there are far more factors at play that determine the course of history, and most
[Amit Varma]: of those don't make it to the narrative that we later tell about it.
[Amit Varma]: Also, historians come along who look further, who look deeper, and expand that narrative
[Amit Varma]: and our knowledge of the world.
[Amit Varma]: Srinath Raghavan is one such historian, and Bangladesh is one such subject.
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Scene and the Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics, and behavioral
[Unknown]: science.
[Amit Varma]: Please welcome your host, Amit Varma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Scene and the Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: My topic today is the Bangladesh War of 1971, but not the events of the war itself, but
[Amit Varma]: the global forces that shaped those circumstances.
[Amit Varma]: People often think of the breakup of Pakistan as if it was inevitable, and people often
[Amit Varma]: see it as a bilateral conflict between India and Pakistan.
[Amit Varma]: None of those are quite true.
[Amit Varma]: Srinath Raghavan's book, 1971, A Global History of the Creation of Bangladesh, takes
[Amit Varma]: a deep look at the international events that led to the creation of Bangladesh, and the
[Amit Varma]: actions of not just India and Pakistan, but also the USA, the Soviet Union, and China.
[Amit Varma]: But before we get to my conversation with Srinath, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: This episode of The Scene and the Unseen is brought to you by Storytel.
[Amit Varma]: Storytel is an audiobook platform which you can listen to on your Android or iOS app.
[Amit Varma]: They have thousands of audiobooks you can listen to on your mobile, including hundreds
[Amit Varma]: in local languages like Hindi and Marathi.
[Amit Varma]: An unlimited monthly subscription costs only 2.99 a month, but you can get a 30-day free
[Amit Varma]: trial if you hop on over to Storytel.com slash IVM.
[Amit Varma]: Now I actually use Storytel myself regularly, so as long as they sponsor this show, I'm
[Amit Varma]: going to recommend one book a week that I love.
[Amit Varma]: My first recommendation is actually a Hindi audiobook of one of the greatest novels ever
[Amit Varma]: written, Raag Darbari by Srilal Shukla.
[Amit Varma]: Raag Darbari was written in 1968 and is a powerful satire that nails the nature of government
[Amit Varma]: and bureaucracy and life in India, every libertarian will love it, and is still as relevant and
[Amit Varma]: biting and trenchant as it was then.
[Amit Varma]: I first read it in its English translation, was blown away, and had always intended to
[Amit Varma]: read it also in Hindi.
[Amit Varma]: Because if the English translation is so good, how good will the Hindi be?
[Amit Varma]: Well, now I've heard it and it's mind-blowing.
[Amit Varma]: Listen to Raag Darbari on Storytel and remember, you get a 30-day free trial only at Storytel.com
[Amit Varma]: slash IVM.
[Amit Varma]: Srinath, welcome again to the scene and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Great to be here.
[Amit Varma]: So Srinath, I'm going to begin by exploring an angle I sort of explored with, you know,
[Amit Varma]: when I did a couple of episodes on Gandhi with Ramchandra Buha, and where I asked him
[Amit Varma]: about the difficulty of being a historian, given that we are wired for what is called
[Amit Varma]: the hindsight bias, that when you look back at history, everything seems inevitable.
[Amit Varma]: And it struck me when I was reading your book on Bangladesh, 1971, that that's one of your
[Amit Varma]: starting premises for the book is that the that sense of inevitability plays out especially
[Amit Varma]: strongly with Bangladesh.
[Amit Varma]: And it wasn't at all as inevitable and you examine the various reasons why.
[Amit Varma]: But just as a general question, if I may pose the same question to you that I posed to Ram,
[Amit Varma]: how do you sort of mentally take that step back from that sense of inevitability?
[Guest]: Well, so historians have a saying that, you know, life is lived forwards, but understood
[Guest]: backwards, right?
[Guest]: So in a sense, the challenge for the historian is how do you sort of try and find some kind
[Guest]: of a point, which does not exclusively privilege hindsight, but hindsight is absolutely important,
[Guest]: because that's the only way you can make sense of things together.
[Guest]: And to have that sense of contingency, but also causality in play, is I think a bit of
[Guest]: a balance that you strike as you go along.
[Guest]: In a sense, there is no formula for it.
[Guest]: It's more of a craft and how you sort of approach things, right?
[Guest]: So this is great historian of the French Revolution, who is to say that, you know, before it happens,
[Guest]: every revolution seems impossible.
[Guest]: But after it happens, it seems inevitable, right?
[Guest]: And that that's true of most great things like the Bangladesh emergence of an independent
[Guest]: country and so on.
[Guest]: So the challenge for me in writing this book was precisely to come to terms with that kind
[Guest]: of a meta question of saying, how are we going to tell the story without making it all seem
[Guest]: as if it was so predetermined, which in some ways also takes away agency from people at
[Guest]: the end of the day, history is made by people themselves.
[Amit Varma]: And specifically, how did you arrive at Bangladesh?
[Guest]: Well, I was actually working on a PhD thesis focusing on Indian foreign policy in the sort
[Guest]: of early years, primarily focusing on the Nehru period.
[Guest]: And I was working in the Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
[Guest]: This was in the early 2000s.
[Guest]: And at that point of time, the papers of P. N. Huxer, who was Indira Gandhi's principal
[Guest]: secretary during that period, were actually sort of deposited and made available to scholars.
[Guest]: So I was one of the first people to sort of go through them, you know, it's a very large
[Guest]: collection.
[Guest]: Lately, we've had Jairam Ramesh writing a biography of P. N. Huxer, which makes very
[Guest]: good thorough use of all those sources.
[Guest]: But I think I was one of the first people to actually see that.
[Guest]: And it very quickly struck me that there was very interesting material on the Bangladesh
[Guest]: crisis, which suggested very different points of view, even ab initio.
[Guest]: And then I decided to sort of make that a project.
[Guest]: But it also struck me that it would be useful to widen out the perspective and not just
[Guest]: do an India-centered account of how the Indians approached the crisis, but to look at the
[Guest]: crisis as a whole, to understand this very important historical event in post-colonial
[Guest]: South Asia, which is the emergence of Bangladesh, and to sort of do it on a much wider canvas.
[Guest]: So that's how the project really began.
[Guest]: And then I started working in a range of other archives, you know, I've sort of worked in
[Guest]: Britain, America, Canada, Australia, the Soviet Union, Germany.
[Guest]: So all of these archives then kind of opened up a much more sort of multifaceted sort of
[Guest]: portrait of the period and of that particular event itself.
[Amit Varma]: And just as an aside, your book is full of these illuminations and insights from the
[Amit Varma]: so to say bit players like Huxer, D.P.
[Amit Varma]: Dhar, P.N.
[Amit Varma]: Dhar, who all sound like, you know, fairly evolved intellects, you know, not what you
[Amit Varma]: would expect the typical, what the stereotype of the Babu or the bureaucrat is.
[Amit Varma]: And that that was also fascinating to me to see those sort of influences upon our Prime
[Guest]: Minister.
[Guest]: Oh, yeah, absolutely.
[Guest]: And one of the sort of key strengths, which Indira Gandhi had, particularly in her early
[Guest]: period of her sort of prime ministerial career, was to be able to accumulate this kind of
[Guest]: very high quality talent of civil servants, people with, you know, sort of, you know,
[Guest]: foreign policy experience with intelligence background, to be able to sort of assist her.
[Guest]: And at least in the case of the Bangladesh crisis, I think these people were not just
[Guest]: bit players, they were very important, you know, and someone like P.N.
[Guest]: Huxer was literally sort of the person holding various strands of crisis management together
[Guest]: on behalf of the Prime Minister, of course, and looking through those notes and, you know,
[Guest]: the letters that they wrote to each other about what Mrs. Gandhi told them in certain
[Guest]: meetings and so on was absolutely fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, much more erudite and crisp and better articulated than many op-eds of the day, which
[Amit Varma]: you might find.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm intrigued by, you know, an early sentence in your book, which I found in the introduction
[Amit Varma]: to your book, which is, quote, professional historians of South Asia remain reluctant
[Amit Varma]: to venture beyond the boundary of 1947, stop quote.
[Guest]: What do you mean by this?
[Guest]: Can you elaborate?
[Guest]: What I meant to say was that the study of South Asian history, as it happens in universities,
[Guest]: as done by historians who sort of teach and research in sort of universities and so on,
[Guest]: is still very much focused either on the colonial period or the pre-colonial past.
[Guest]: The immediate sort of post-independence period and or the post-colonial period in South Asia
[Guest]: as a whole still remains something that historians are reluctant to touch, partly because they
[Guest]: see it as too close to their time, partly because the archives for the older period
[Guest]: are much better organized, more easily, you know, if you want to work on some topic to
[Guest]: do with British India, you can go to the British Library in London, you can look at the National
[Guest]: Archives in India, you'd get a reasonable, whereas for the post-colonial period, especially
[Guest]: when I was working on the book, things have changed a little bit since then.
[Guest]: The official archives were almost, you know, had close to zero holdings.
[Guest]: So you had to sort of go through private papers, which is what I was doing, you know, Luxor
[Guest]: and others, and then use various other kinds of official archives from other countries.
[Guest]: So you, in a sense, that remains a challenge.
[Guest]: The second thing is that, you know, there is some kind of a sort of a tacit intellectual
[Guest]: or whatever academic division of labor, which has happened, which is to say that historians
[Guest]: typically look at everything before independence, whereas, you know, it's the political scientists
[Guest]: or international relations scholars who look at the more immediate past.
[Guest]: But I think, you know, that then leaves out a very large arena of our contemporary existence,
[Guest]: which I think needs to be bought under the, you know, the domain of history proper and
[Guest]: of historical investigation and writing.
[Guest]: I'm happy to say that since I wrote those words, I mean, things do seem to be moving,
[Guest]: though not as quickly as we'd like it to.
[Guest]: But I think we definitely have a range of books now coming out, which also try and treat
[Guest]: the sort of post-independence, post-colonial period in the same historical fashion as you
[Guest]: would do with anything in the distant past.
[Amit Varma]: And I'd imagine without the bedrock of history, even political science then has a problem
[Guest]: just dealing with the material, right?
[Guest]: Well, I mean, I think a big part of the problem with a lot of Indian political science writing
[Guest]: is precisely that it's very ahistorical and, you know, tends to treat the present as if
[Guest]: it does not have a past.
[Guest]: And that, you know, the way that institutions, structures, and processes have evolved historically
[Guest]: is somehow not of any moment or concern, that the only thing which matters is what is the
[Guest]: dynamic today.
[Guest]: And I think that that ahistorical quality is, I think, been one of the significant drawbacks
[Guest]: of Indian political science writing.
[Guest]: But at the same time, I think the best Indian political scientists are people who have sort
[Guest]: of, you know, used historical knowledge and historical materials, really, to throw light
[Guest]: on political processes in more closer periods of time.
[Amit Varma]: And could the converse also be true?
[Amit Varma]: Like as a historian, do you sometimes feel that you're wearing the hat of a political
[Amit Varma]: scientist also when writing parts of your text?
[Guest]: Well, the way I sort of tend to approach all of these things is to say that, you know,
[Guest]: not just political science, but social sciences more broadly are very important for me because
[Guest]: that gives me heuristic devices with which I approach the archives.
[Guest]: You know, archives and sources don't tell you any stories, you have to ask questions
[Guest]: of them, you know.
[Guest]: And for that, you need to have some questions which come out of broader conceptual theoretical
[Guest]: sort of basis.
[Guest]: Now, you know, I don't go out with a view of trying to prove or disprove this or that
[Guest]: theory.
[Guest]: But as a heuristic device, I think social sciences are very important for the historian's
[Guest]: craft.
[Guest]: But of course, you know, in terms of my own choice, I still prefer the narrative, which
[Guest]: I think is the domain in which history is best explored and written and presented.
[Guest]: And so I choose the narrative as the main device through which to tell the story.
[Amit Varma]: So is there sort of a fine balance there that a historian needs to maintain between the
[Amit Varma]: narrative that they're presenting and the perspectives that they might wish to bear
[Guest]: upon that narrative?
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So, you know, historical narratives, contrary to sort of what, you know, other social sciences
[Guest]: typically tend to think are not just about telling a story, right?
[Guest]: I mean, you're trying to make a causal argument.
[Guest]: I think the central difference between, say, most other social sciences and histories,
[Guest]: and I say most because there are exceptions, is that historians are interested in change,
[Guest]: whereas other social sciences are typically interested in trying to find longer term continuities,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: So they may use historical materials, but with a view to saying so and so process or
[Guest]: so and so pattern is recurrent, if these are the initial conditions, these are likely to
[Guest]: be the outcomes, right?
[Guest]: So, so that is the kind of exercise that they are engaged in.
[Guest]: Whereas for historians, the challenge is not that we're not interested in generalization,
[Guest]: we are.
[Guest]: But the bigger problem that you're interested in isn't change.
[Guest]: How does change happen?
[Guest]: How does a country like Pakistan break up into two parts is exactly the kind of questions
[Amit Varma]: that historians are drawn to.
[Amit Varma]: And getting back to the breakup of Pakistan, again, early in your book, you say that the
[Amit Varma]: typical prisms through when one looks at Bangladesh are insularity and determinism, we've already
[Amit Varma]: spoken about determinism and by insularity, I guess you mean that, you know, people tend
[Amit Varma]: to think of it as either something that concerns Bangladesh alone, or it's an India Pakistan
[Amit Varma]: dynamic and what your book tries to bring out is that there are sort of these geopolitical
[Amit Varma]: waves of events and, you know, all with their unintended consequences, which are sweeping
[Amit Varma]: through at the time and Bangladesh is really a result of those, I mean, as you said later,
[Amit Varma]: it's far from being predestined, it's a product of conjuncture and contingency, choice and
[Guest]: chance.
[Guest]: Yeah, that's true.
[Guest]: I mean, in a sense that much of the writing on the creation of Bangladesh, it tends to
[Guest]: be either from the perspective of trying to tell the story of how Bangladeshi or Bengali
[Guest]: nationalism sort of rose and, you know, attained its destiny as an independent nation, or it
[Guest]: is about saying why Pakistan, as it was in 1947, kind of was an unworkable project and
[Guest]: so on.
[Guest]: So there is an implicit sort of teleology and determinism, which is built into most
[Guest]: of our storylines to greater and lesser extents, but that's the standard way in which we think.
[Guest]: And of course, in India, we have our own story of, you know, this being the most important
[Guest]: sort of moment of India sort of, you know, falsifying the two nation theory and so on.
[Guest]: Now, I don't for a minute say that any of these narratives are strong.
[Guest]: What I want to say is that they are incomplete, and that if you really want a more satisfactory
[Guest]: explanation of why this particular momentous event occurred, then you have to place it
[Guest]: not just within a national or a regional frame, but actually in something of a global, it's
[Guest]: an international and transnational frame.
[Amit Varma]: And that's what really the book tends to do.
[Amit Varma]: And in a sense, all of this, all of what happened in Bangladesh in 71 has its roots, obviously,
[Amit Varma]: in the 60s under Ayub Khan, and specifically in the context of, say, 1968, when the student
[Amit Varma]: rebellion start and all of that, you talk about the three historical processes that
[Amit Varma]: shaped the global context of those years, the first being decolonization.
[Guest]: Can you tell me a little bit more about that?
[Guest]: Well, decolonization, you know, obviously, is a breakup of the old sort of European empires
[Guest]: in the post Second World War period, India was in the first wave of decolonization.
[Guest]: But by the late 1960s, you had several other countries across Asia and Africa, which have
[Guest]: gone through, you know, process of decolonization, but which are also in their postcolonial existence
[Guest]: coming up with various forms of other kinds of issues, borders, ethnicities, various kinds
[Guest]: of rivalries left behind by older forms of colonial control, and so on.
[Guest]: So in a sense, what is happening in Bangladesh is therefore best understood as a continuation
[Guest]: of this larger process of decolonization, even though it is happening within the context
[Guest]: of a country which is already, you know, out of colonial control, which is Pakistan.
[Guest]: But nevertheless, the imperatives and the processes seem to me to be very similar to
[Guest]: what was happening with a number of other countries, particularly in Africa at that
[Guest]: point of time.
[Guest]: So it is very important, therefore, to sort of put it into that frame.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: And the second process you mentioned, the frame of the Cold War.
[Guest]: Yeah, the Cold War is again, you know, something which depending on when you want to date it
[Guest]: starts somewhere after the Second World War and before the late 1940s.
[Guest]: And the Cold War is typically understood as a sort of a geopolitical and ideological rivalry
[Guest]: between the United States and its allies, the so-called free world, and the Soviet Union
[Guest]: and its allies, the so-called communist bloc.
[Guest]: But what is interesting is that by the late 1960s, you know, the Cold War no longer looks
[Guest]: like this contest between two rigidly organized blocs.
[Guest]: There is a lot of sort of, you know, moving and, you know, turning around of pieces within
[Guest]: each of these blocs.
[Guest]: And one of the big important things, of course, was the split between the Chinese and the
[Guest]: Soviet Union, which was already coming to the fore by that time, and which plays an
[Guest]: important role in the story of Bangladesh as well.
[Guest]: So in a sense, it was important, therefore, to suggest that, you know, this was an important
[Guest]: moment in the Cold War, the realignment of the sort of important pieces of the Cold War
[Guest]: geopolitics, the waning of some of the ideological competition in the context of the Cold War,
[Guest]: and how that impacts on an event which is not anywhere in the center of things where
[Guest]: the Cold War was playing out, which is in South Asia.
[Amit Varma]: Oh, and as you go on to sort of talk about in the book, and we'll discuss in the second
[Amit Varma]: half of this podcast, right, you know, that that simplistic notion that many people have
[Amit Varma]: and that indeed I had before I read this book that, oh, the US was siding with Pakistan
[Amit Varma]: and the Soviet Union was with India and blah, blah, blah is actually not true at all.
[Amit Varma]: There were there was a lot of sort of negotiations and to's and fro's happening in this period
[Amit Varma]: with China playing a major part, but I will come to that later in the podcast.
[Amit Varma]: The next process you mentioned, globalization.
[Guest]: Yeah, so, you know, decolonization and Cold War, I think are, you know, you can reasonably
[Guest]: sort of have a sense of what they are.
[Guest]: But globalization is something that we, at least in our current context, tend to think
[Guest]: of as something which is very much a post Cold War kind of a moment, right?
[Guest]: I mean, you want to think about Francis Fukuyama sometime in 1989 announcing the end of history,
[Guest]: saying that all kinds of, you know, ideological rivalries are coming out.
[Guest]: That is the moment when Americans sort of attempt to, you know, to create an integrated
[Guest]: capitalist global economy really takes off and so on.
[Guest]: But one of the things which historians have been pointing to us, and I sort of picked
[Guest]: up on that literature and built it up, was to say that, you know, what we think of as
[Guest]: the current wave of globalization, you know, actually is something which begins in the
[Guest]: early 70s and late 1960s, early 70s is when the first, you know, real wave of sort of
[Guest]: globalization begins.
[Guest]: By which I mean that there are a number of, you know, events and processes which are coming
[Guest]: together, which are bringing disparate parts of the world in some sort of communication
[Guest]: with one another, right?
[Guest]: So you have the huge explosion of air travel during that period, so people are traveling
[Guest]: to one place another, the whole story of containerization and so on, you know, already sort of starting
[Guest]: to take off.
[Guest]: There's a huge standardization of various kinds of, you know, economic processes, but
[Guest]: also other kinds of things.
[Guest]: There is a much greater spread of non-governmental organizations which are trying to bring standardization
[Guest]: even in terms of values, right?
[Guest]: I mean, the rise of something like human rights, for instance, happens in a much more global
[Guest]: context in the same period.
[Guest]: So in that sense, not just as a process of economic globalization and integration, but
[Guest]: as one where events and processes which happen in one part of the world are quite tightly
[Guest]: linked to what is happening elsewhere.
[Guest]: And it seemed to me that this phenomenon is very well established already by the late
[Guest]: 1960s.
[Guest]: Of course, contemporary forms of globalization evolved historically from there on.
[Guest]: But that was a very important moment when this began.
[Guest]: And again, as I point out in the book, this had important implications for the way the
[Amit Varma]: Bangladesh crisis plays out.
[Amit Varma]: And elsewhere, you point out about how there was sort of a technological explosion during
[Amit Varma]: this time.
[Amit Varma]: One of the first televisions came to Pakistan in 1968.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, it was a sort of an inflection point for this kind of cultural globalization,
[Amit Varma]: which seemed to me, you know, when I was reading it, that is very analogous to the current
[Amit Varma]: day, when social media has, you know, sort of led to a similar sort of deepening of that
[Amit Varma]: whole process of cultural globalization.
[Amit Varma]: Give me a little bit of context into what Pakistan was like in 68.
[Amit Varma]: Ayub Khan had already been in charge for many years.
[Amit Varma]: People often said that, you know, under him, there was sort of a new Pakistan, which was
[Amit Varma]: emerging.
[Amit Varma]: Ayub himself stood for stability and growth.
[Amit Varma]: He got a fair amount of support from the US, which is, you know, a process that started
[Amit Varma]: a decade earlier.
[Amit Varma]: Just lay the context for me coming to 1968, you know, when it might seem, say, in the
[Amit Varma]: mid to late 60s, that this guy's going to be here for a long time.
[Guest]: And then, like you said, overnight, he's gone.
[Guest]: Well, 1960s are a very important and interesting decade in the history of Pakistan, which is
[Guest]: to say that, you know, that was a decade when Pakistan registered, at least in terms of
[Guest]: GDP growth and quite an extraordinary accomplishment of almost averaging about 6% annual GDP growth
[Guest]: over that decade.
[Guest]: That was possible because, you know, Ayub Khan was sort of following a set of, you know,
[Guest]: planned economic policies, which were actually a lot of it was crafted by American economists,
[Guest]: the Harvard Advisory Group and others who were helping him, you know, do it.
[Guest]: And Pakistan also got onto the bandwagon of the Green Revolution even before India did.
[Guest]: They started in the early 60s itself.
[Guest]: So, in that sense, this was a decade when Pakistan actually witnessed considerable levels
[Guest]: of economic growth.
[Guest]: But that economic growth as by the end of the decade was, it was becoming was, was very,
[Guest]: very lopsided.
[Guest]: And some of the Harvard economists who are advising the Pakistanis themselves conceded
[Guest]: that, in a sense, their policies were aimed towards fostering capital accumulation and
[Guest]: investment.
[Guest]: But the groups which are capable of doing it were very small.
[Guest]: In fact, at one point of time, the head of the Pakistani Planning Commission said that
[Guest]: there were just 22 families in Pakistan, which accounted for something like 85 to 90% of
[Guest]: the country's wealth.
[Guest]: So there was an extraordinary concentration of wealth by conscious government policy,
[Guest]: you know, giving tax breaks, you know, basically all the things that you want to do to enable
[Guest]: capitalist accumulation and investment was the game.
[Guest]: And that, in the Pakistani context, got exacerbated because of the sort of geographical disparities
[Guest]: between West Pakistan and East Pakistan.
[Guest]: So if you can just take a step back, right, so in 1947, when Pakistan is created, you
[Guest]: have this kind of completely geographically anomalous entity coming out, which is West
[Guest]: Pakistan, which is today's Pakistan and, you know, East Pakistan, which is today's Bangladesh,
[Guest]: being under sort of one particular sort of, you know, being the same country and in a
[Guest]: similar regime.
[Guest]: In fact, in this novel, Shame, Salman Rushdie has this fantastic line where he says that
[Guest]: United Pakistan was a strange bird.
[Guest]: It was two wings without a body, right?
[Guest]: Because that body was effectively, you were separated by India.
[Guest]: So there was this tendency to assume, therefore, that, you know, divide between these two parts
[Guest]: is not just geographic, but, you know, there was sort of economic disparities.
[Guest]: East Pakistan was the more sort of, you know, commodity producing area.
[Guest]: Things like jute used to grow there, exports of those in, you know, earned dollars for
[Guest]: the Pakistani government, but a lot of the investment and industrial development was
[Guest]: actually happening in the West.
[Guest]: So there was this regional disparity of economic growth as well, not just in terms of class
[Guest]: sort of differentiation.
[Guest]: And there were, of course, language issues, like Urdu being the official language.
[Guest]: And that sort of language issue was in some ways the first major trigger, right?
[Guest]: The first sort of major movement in East Pakistan actually happens over the fact that Bengali
[Guest]: is not initially accepted as an important language of the state, which is not just a
[Guest]: cultural issue, but it's one to do with employment and stuff.
[Guest]: So if you want to become a Pakistani civil servant, you will have to write exams in Urdu,
[Guest]: right?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, so in a sense, you know, your knowledge of Bengali doesn't count for very much.
[Amit Varma]: So all this time, it's interesting to me that, you know, that the eastern wing of Pakistan
[Guest]: is actually more populous.
[Guest]: Yeah, it is in terms of just number of people, eastern wing of Pakistan was always more populous.
[Guest]: And, you know, a united Pakistan did not have an election till 1970.
[Guest]: But if you had by that point of time, majority of the electorate was also in East Pakistan,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: So, so in a sense, the fact that normal democratic pressures were not bought to bear in this
[Guest]: period allowed this kind of, you know, disparate economic growth to happen.
[Guest]: And the diversity between the two regions was there.
[Guest]: So, you know, it's, it's again, what is ironic and fascinating about this period is that,
[Guest]: you know, the period of Pakistan's sort of immense, you know, an impressive sort of economic
[Guest]: growth in the 1960s.
[Guest]: The economists who are there in the Pakistani Planning Commission are primarily of Bengali
[Guest]: origin.
[Guest]: Oh, yeah.
[Guest]: And by the end of the decade, it is those economists who are coming up with this critique
[Guest]: of the economic system of Pakistan as effectively a neo-colonial one.
[Guest]: They say that East Pakistan has become a commodity producing area, like all old colonies used
[Guest]: to be.
[Guest]: And all the sort of, you know, stuff in terms of, you know, new industries, investment,
[Guest]: etc. is primarily happening in the West.
[Guest]: So and then East then becomes a importer of the commodities of the West.
[Guest]: And it's in that context that a lot of these arguments came to be crystallized and the
[Guest]: relationship came to be seen as fundamentally a neo-colonial one.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, a little later, there's a quote from Mujib, which I kind of mark down, which is
[Amit Varma]: quote, the basic truth that every Bengali has felt in his bones, that we have been treated
[Amit Varma]: for so long as a colony and a market.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote, which is, you know, so therefore, in a sense, you could say that the Bangladeshi
[Amit Varma]: fight for independence as it became due to circumstances was analogous to the Indian
[Amit Varma]: fight for independence.
[Guest]: Yeah, it was analogous to the Indian fight for independence.
[Guest]: I think the other analogy, of course, is the similar sorts of arguments which are being
[Guest]: made around the same time in Latin America about dependency theories and so on.
[Guest]: So you can see that, you know, here, this argument is being extended to a one single
[Guest]: economy, which, of course, has got these two sort of geographic.
[Amit Varma]: Just can you elaborate on the Latin American argument?
[Guest]: I mean, the Latin American argument was primarily to say that, you know, many of these countries,
[Guest]: Latin America, of course, you know, became formally decolonized much before Asia and
[Guest]: Africa did.
[Guest]: But the point was to say that, you know, in the post Second World War period, the patterns
[Guest]: of capitalist development in the Western world was such that areas like Latin America were
[Guest]: effectively seen as commodity producing in a similar sort of a relation, right?
[Guest]: So that's not where this thing.
[Guest]: So there is a sort of a tendency to think that we need to have our own sort of, you
[Guest]: know, model of economic development, which is kind of independent of this kind of thing.
[Guest]: However, of course, many economies attempted these import substitution policies during
[Guest]: that period.
[Guest]: But what is interesting, of course, is that all of this happening within the context of
[Guest]: Pakistan, right?
[Guest]: So the whole argument of a neo-colonial sort of feeling, which Malib's quote captures,
[Guest]: was one which was being felt by people who belong to the same state.
[Guest]: So in that sense, it was a much more, I mean, you could have had similar policies in India,
[Guest]: for instance, but the Indian government of the time, the Nehru government, you know,
[Guest]: took a conscious decision to enable investment in various parts of India to precisely prevent
[Guest]: this kind of very lopsided economic growth and development and so on, which the Pakistanis
[Guest]: never took seriously.
[Guest]: And a lot of that investment did happen in the context of West Pakistan.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about 1968 then, you know, there was youthful revolt in Pakistan.
[Amit Varma]: And it's not just in Pakistan, it was almost sort of a global thing that, you know, the
[Amit Varma]: youth was rising up everywhere in America, you had the anti-Vietnam feeling, there was
[Amit Varma]: this anti-establishment feeling everywhere.
[Amit Varma]: What's going on here, what are the kind of factors that go into something like this?
[Guest]: Yeah, so 1968 is actually, I think, a good example of how the processes of incipient
[Guest]: globalization came to sort of impact what is happening in the context of Pakistan.
[Guest]: Because you know, the student revolts of 1968, as you said, was a global phenomenon.
[Guest]: Of course, everywhere they had local particular sort of issues which were in play.
[Guest]: But nevertheless, student groups across the world took the cues from one another, right.
[Guest]: And it's important to remember just how widespread this was.
[Guest]: And television came to Pakistan in 1968, so they can see everything.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So you had, of course, student revolts happening in the United States, which was also triggered
[Guest]: by the civil rights, Vietnam War, and that involvement.
[Guest]: But you had similar things happening in France, in Italy, in Germany.
[Guest]: You also had it in the Soviet bloc, right.
[Guest]: In the post 1968, the Czechoslovakia incident, there was, you know, all of that story.
[Guest]: There was a student movement happening in Japan at the point of time, there was a cultural
[Guest]: revolution in China, which was again a student sort of led thing.
[Guest]: So what is happening across the world in some ways was, you know, ricocheting from one place
[Guest]: to another.
[Guest]: People were seeing that this kind of mobilization is happening.
[Guest]: The forms of the mobilization, the vocabularies with local inflections, of course, were still
[Guest]: quite strikingly reminiscent of one another.
[Guest]: And what is interesting is that in Pakistan, the student revolts kind of come towards the
[Guest]: tail end of 1968.
[Guest]: And as you said, you know, television in Pakistan, people are seeing all of this stuff.
[Guest]: And of course, there are sort of individuals who also sort of bring the story like, you
[Guest]: know, the sort of famous student revolutionary of the Oxford sit-ins in the British context
[Guest]: was Tariq Ali, who was from a very well to do Pakistani family.
[Guest]: And as many student revolutionaries tend to be, yeah.
[Guest]: And Tariq Ali actually comes back to Pakistan and, you know, and sees that there is this
[Guest]: whole sort of movement against Ayub Khan's sort of authoritarian regime.
[Guest]: And what is interesting about the student movement in Pakistan in late 1968, early 1969,
[Guest]: is that it actually is in both wings of Pakistan.
[Guest]: It is not as if it's only in the eastern wing of Pakistan, as much in the western wing as
[Amit Varma]: well.
[Guest]: But are they coordinating?
[Guest]: Or they're kind of continuous?
[Guest]: No, no.
[Guest]: In a sense, they do sort of learn from each other, they sort of express solidarity for
[Guest]: one another.
[Amit Varma]: Are they fighting for the same thing?
[Guest]: Yeah, they all believe that the first step towards thing is true for democratization
[Guest]: of Pakistan, right?
[Guest]: So, the authoritarian military government has to go.
[Guest]: And you know, they see that the first step is to sort of give expression to democracy.
[Guest]: And of course, you know, they do succeed, Ayub Khan is forced to step down, which I
[Guest]: think is an important accomplishment for student revolutionaries.
[Guest]: I think they were more successful than almost students anywhere else, possibly with the
[Amit Varma]: exception of France, where they managed to get de Gaulle.
[Amit Varma]: Sometimes one feels like a dog chasing a car is finally caught the car, what do you do
[Guest]: now?
[Guest]: Yeah, exactly.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So, it is a, it was one of those, you know, situations where they sort of got there.
[Guest]: And then of course, that sets the stage for not an immediate transfer of power to the
[Guest]: people.
[Guest]: But, you know, power, you know, there's a military coup, actually, which deposes Ayub
[Guest]: Khan.
[Guest]: So, of course, Yaya Khan comes to power, but very clearly with an agenda of announcing
[Guest]: elections, and managing some kind of a transition to democracy, which would nevertheless leave
[Guest]: the military in a controlling sort of position within the polity.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, when Yaya announces, Masha Allah, you quote him and saying that the army, quote,
[Amit Varma]: must be prepared to rule this unfortunate country for the next 14 years or so.
[Amit Varma]: I simply can't throw this country to the wolves, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And already in his mind, he's, I mean, even though Ayub Khan's resignation and his taking
[Amit Varma]: over is prompted by the student revolts, he's not taking the students or their demands really
[Amit Varma]: that seriously.
[Amit Varma]: He's assumed that this is a period of unrest and the army has to see the country through
[Amit Varma]: and stabilize it.
[Amit Varma]: And it's almost like this sense of both entitlement and denial.
[Guest]: Yeah, absolutely.
[Guest]: I mean, I think Ayub Khan was, you know, for so long seen as such an unimpeachable force
[Guest]: in Pakistani politics, that, you know, he just couldn't bear to sort of, you know, accept
[Guest]: what the reality was as it was unfolding.
[Guest]: But the scale of the revolts, student uprisings, you know, movements by peasants, by various
[Guest]: kinds of labor unions and so on, was of such a scale that ultimately the Pakistan army
[Guest]: felt that they had to sort of intervene and persuade Ayub to move out so that, you know,
[Guest]: they could then restore a modicum of stability.
[Amit Varma]: So I think it was a very powerful moment at that point of time.
[Amit Varma]: And there's another telling quote in your book about how the old guard, quote, failed
[Amit Varma]: to feel the pulse of an electorate over half of whom had been born after the hairy days
[Amit Varma]: of 1947, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And it almost seemed analogous to me as of today, where in India, almost half, more than
[Amit Varma]: half the people are born after liberalization.
[Amit Varma]: And yet our politicians on average are like these 60-70 year old fogies who simply don't
[Amit Varma]: get it.
[Amit Varma]: And whatever the pulse of the nation is, I'm not saying there is one that would be a simplistic
[Amit Varma]: narrative.
[Amit Varma]: But if there was a pulse, those guys who are running the country aren't really equipped
[Amit Varma]: to get what's going on, right?
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: And the generational gap was kind of one of the major factors for the driver of this thing.
[Guest]: In a way that actually was in many of the other 1968 revolts.
[Guest]: But in the context of Pakistan, particularly, I think that was definitely a very important
[Guest]: part of the story, which was to say that, you know, the military and Ayub Khan in particular,
[Guest]: but even Yahya Khan later, underestimated the extent to which they would be able to
[Guest]: sort of control these developments or call upon, you know, sort of abstract calls for
[Guest]: national unity, discipline, etc. as a way of mobilizing and harnessing these energies,
[Amit Varma]: which proved to be wrong.
[Amit Varma]: And it seemed to me, correct me if I'm reading it wrong, but it seemed to me that even with
[Amit Varma]: Mujibur Rahman, who actually eventually got an independent Bangladesh and came to power
[Amit Varma]: because of all of these forces and these ferments, was himself not in control of it at all.
[Amit Varma]: You know, he was a conventional politician within the framework of Pakistan, he'd been
[Amit Varma]: a minister and all that, you know, in March 1966, he comes out with a six point program
[Amit Varma]: for autonomy, where he wants more autonomy, and I suppose more of a federalist structure
[Amit Varma]: for where Bangladesh has more power within the thing.
[Amit Varma]: And instead of becoming, you know, the starting tool with which you begin negotiations, that
[Amit Varma]: becomes a minimum acceptable thing once the movement for Bangladeshi independence gets
[Amit Varma]: going because he is suddenly captive to the wishes of the student revolution and the extremists
[Amit Varma]: in his party.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And he is forced into all of those strands he might not otherwise take.
[Guest]: That's I think quite true.
[Guest]: And I think that transformation is again something that is peculiar to the late 1960s, which
[Guest]: is why I don't buy into this argument that, you know, Bangladesh was predestined to break
[Guest]: up because, you know, you had this Bengali majority, which was never given its due and
[Guest]: so on.
[Guest]: Actually speaking, for politicians of Mujibur Rahman generation, the real dream was to sort
[Guest]: of not get an independent state, but to take control of all of Pakistan, which a democratic
[Guest]: majority could have put them in power, right.
[Guest]: And as we'll see, you know, even the Indians thought that that actually would not be such
[Guest]: a bad outcome for their own sort of
[Guest]: That'd be a great outcome.
[Guest]: Do you think they'd be fighting with us so much if that was the case?
[Guest]: Well, so that was the argument at that point in time, right.
[Guest]: So the assumption was that, listen, the Bengalis are not interested in Kashmir, they are not
[Guest]: interested in they want better relations with us.
[Guest]: All of it might have been reasonable assumptions.
[Guest]: But that's the framework within which people saw, which is why I think it's anachronistic
[Guest]: to think that that framework was already doomed to sort of, you know, extinction by the time
[Guest]: that these things were playing out.
[Guest]: Not at all.
[Guest]: So in the minds of contemporaries, these were important structures, which you could not
[Guest]: break away so easily from, you know, it's never an easy thing to be able to do.
[Guest]: It's a bit, actually, I think the best analogy is with, you know, what Jinnah wanted with
[Guest]: in terms of his Pakistan in, you know, pre-independence India, right?
[Guest]: I mean, it's not very clear that even he believed that at all points that that outcome
[Guest]: was likely.
[Guest]: So, Mujibur Rahman, yes, was very much someone who was there.
[Guest]: The six-point agenda was very much a federal plan.
[Guest]: But in a sense, because of the radicalization of the students who then sort of energized
[Guest]: the Awami League, took it to a very different level and Mujib was a remarkable leader in
[Guest]: his own right.
[Guest]: I mean, in a sense, he was, you know, he was able to harness those energies, he was able
[Guest]: to give them voice and expression in a way that I think was quite remarkable at that
[Guest]: point of time.
[Guest]: But yes, he was also hamstrung by the fact that much of the energy behind his sort of
[Guest]: political party and the six-point demand was now being channeled through younger people
[Guest]: who wanted more.
[Amit Varma]: And an interesting analog that comes to mind, I did a recent episode with the historian
[Amit Varma]: Gyan Prakash in The Emergency.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the things I sort of learned reading his book was that, I mean, obviously, there
[Amit Varma]: was similar student sort of unrest in India as well.
[Amit Varma]: And there, again, when there was a student unrest in 74-75, it starts as a student unrest
[Amit Varma]: in Bihar with the likes of Lalu and Nitesh, who are the student leaders.
[Amit Varma]: But it only really gathers momentum when an older leader like Jayaprakash Narayan comes
[Amit Varma]: and kind of takes it over.
[Amit Varma]: And it, I mean, again, a similar thing in Bangladesh, where it's a student revolt proper
[Amit Varma]: and Mujib sort of becomes a figurehead of the thing.
[Amit Varma]: Is that something common to kind of student movements where they have to, you know?
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So, you know, the great historian Eric Hobsbawm used to say that, you know, the problem with
[Guest]: student politics is that, you know, each student generation is only about two or three years
[Unknown]: in its time.
[Unknown]: Right?
[Guest]: It's a transient politics.
[Guest]: It is difficult to give it kind of institutional structure and framework, which will allow
[Guest]: it to be played over a reasonable period of time to bring about student change.
[Guest]: Of course, one way of solving the problem is the way that Indian political parties do,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: You have these youth wings, which are led by people who are in their 40s, as if any
[Guest]: of that counts as student politics.
[Guest]: But the real energy of student politics really is people who believe that, whose idealism
[Guest]: leads them to believe that, you know, all the structures of possibility can be done
[Guest]: away with and you can actually aim at something a lot more.
[Guest]: But that needs to be channelized through formal politics of a certain kind.
[Guest]: And Mujibur Rahman was, I think, the right man at the right time.
[Guest]: And, you know, that's partly the reason he's so venerated in Bangladesh.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, he was named Bongo Bandhu at that point of time.
[Guest]: And partly because, you know, he was a phenomenal orator, a very charismatic leader, someone
[Guest]: who understood what the needs of the time were, but was still trying to see if there
[Guest]: could be some way out, which did not involve excessive sort of violence and bloodshed and
[Guest]: so on.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, another interesting sort of learning that came up on me from your book
[Amit Varma]: was that contrary to popular hindsight perception, it's not like Mujib wanted independence from
[Amit Varma]: the start.
[Amit Varma]: And, and even later, as we find, it's not like Indira was this great warrior who wanted
[Amit Varma]: to bring Bangladesh to independence, they were both almost very reluctant for a long
[Amit Varma]: part of that journey till events force themselves upon these two people.
[Guest]: Yeah, I think that's certainly true of Mujibur Rahman, see, because the elections of 1970,
[Guest]: by the time the election results come out in December 1970, it is very clear that the
[Guest]: Awami League is the single largest party.
[Guest]: But there is a structural problem in as much as the Awami League has won pretty much every
[Guest]: seat in East Pakistan, barring two, but has won no seat in West Pakistan.
[Guest]: And the biggest West Pakistani party was Pakistan's People's Party, PPP, which still exists.
[Guest]: Then a new party recently founded by Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto, which had did a reasonably good
[Guest]: showing in West Pakistan, but managed to sort of do almost nothing in the East.
[Guest]: So there was this kind of cleavage between these two sides, in a sense that there was
[Guest]: no political force, which was able to bridge this kind of East West barrier, so to speak.
[Guest]: But if you were talking about a normal parliamentary system of democracy, the natural thing would
[Guest]: have been to invite the leader of the largest party to form government, and that is precisely
[Guest]: what Mujib and the Awami League were hoping would happen.
[Guest]: But the army and, you know, Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto had different plans, and so things took a
[Guest]: very different turn.
[Amit Varma]: So Yahya was almost blindsided by the results, he didn't expect it.
[Amit Varma]: And in fact, because he, you know, gave his prognosis to the Americans who trusted him
[Amit Varma]: so much, even they were blindsided by it.
[Guest]: Well, I think everyone was taken to a greater or lesser extent by the, you know, by surprise
[Guest]: of the outcome, particularly of the Awami League's sort of extraordinary performance
[Guest]: in the East.
[Guest]: You know, I think that was something that the Pakistan army did not foresee.
[Guest]: And of course, the Pakistan military and its intelligence agencies had, you know, had done
[Guest]: their homework before the elections to make sure that, you know, the outcome would not
[Guest]: be very unfavorable to what they wanted.
[Guest]: But that turned out to be entirely wrong and, you know, they were caught in a situation
[Guest]: which they quite did not anticipate would come out.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit about Bhutto here, who's the other major player in this, you know,
[Amit Varma]: seems to me almost as this sort of immoral genius who is ultimately, as we know in history
[Amit Varma]: by hindsight, foiled by his own petard.
[Amit Varma]: But what kind of person is he and what's the role that he's playing here?
[Amit Varma]: What does he want out of all this?
[Amit Varma]: Because he's also been a conventional politician long before this.
[Amit Varma]: He's been with Ayub Khan, he's been a minister and so on.
[Guest]: Yeah, so Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto is, you know, is at least in sheer terms of his political
[Guest]: skill a human, you know, something bordering on genius in terms of the way that he was
[Guest]: able to rise through the Pakistani system.
[Guest]: You know, here was someone who sort of began working in the Ayub Khan administration as
[Guest]: a junior minister, then became very important, became, you know, effectively sort of, you
[Guest]: know, in charge of foreign affairs in that context, egged Ayub Khan to sort of attack
[Guest]: India in 1965.
[Guest]: And then when the war went pear shaped, actually turned around against his old patron, saying
[Guest]: that, you know, Pakistan had been let down and so on, and then went on to find the Pakistan
[Guest]: People's Party, you know, came up with a political style and platform, which was an interesting
[Guest]: amalgam of the left and the sort of right and so on, nationalist, but also very leftist,
[Guest]: you know, because of his role in Pakistan's outreach to China post 1962, the war between
[Guest]: India and China, you know, the leftists were always sort of very wary of taking him on
[Guest]: because he was seen as someone who had, you know, those links with China and so on.
[Guest]: So and it was an extraordinary demagogue, someone who was a very charismatic figure,
[Guest]: who was able to sort of tap into both older forms of politics, you know, he himself came
[Guest]: from Sindh, you know, so he was sort of a very important landlord in the Sindh context,
[Guest]: had all those other, you know, sort of, you know, the religious leadership and the landed
[Guest]: leadership there has sort of very close ties.
[Guest]: So he was able to draw on those kinds of tropes of conducting himself, but at the same time
[Guest]: could also mouth all this sort of radical slogan of roti kapda or makaan, which, you
[Amit Varma]: know, he said,
[Amit Varma]: Which I was amazed to, I saw it, I said, no, no, either Indira said it or is from Bollywood,
[Guest]: it cannot possibly be, but it is very much his and he was able to craft a political movement,
[Guest]: which in a very short span of time, was able to sort of, you know, create a position for
[Guest]: itself, which is quite remarkable.
[Guest]: It is all the more remarkable because, you know, he had to do it, obviously, under the
[Guest]: constraints of operating under a military rule of various kinds and someone whom he
[Guest]: had himself alienated, which is Ayub Khan.
[Guest]: So I think, you know, Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto was quite a remarkable figure in his time,
[Guest]: both during the war, but also subsequently.
[Guest]: And I think, you know, Pakistani history is yet to give him his due in not in a sense
[Guest]: of appreciating his achievements.
[Guest]: I think he was a very mercurial figure with some, you know, really sort of, you know,
[Guest]: nasty things to his credit as well.
[Guest]: But just acknowledging his importance as a historical figure in the history of Pakistan,
[Guest]: I think that that angle of it needs to be, you know, dealt with further by historians.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, moral genius went a long way.
[Amit Varma]: And as you mentioned, who could as a politician be all things to all people, which, you know,
[Amit Varma]: is a skill Narendra Modi himself kind of demonstrated in 2014.
[Amit Varma]: We don't know how much of it will sort of carry over.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me, so the elections are over at the end of 70.
[Amit Varma]: And Yahya is kind of blindsided by the whole result.
[Amit Varma]: And even Bhutto isn't extremely happy because you know, what the hell, I mean, the Awami
[Amit Varma]: League has just got many more seats than him and he's going to have to deal with them at
[Amit Varma]: some point.
[Amit Varma]: And he had assumed that it will be like, he'll be the politician who will rule Pakistan with
[Amit Varma]: the army at his wings.
[Amit Varma]: So I think you quote somewhere in the book where he tells Yahya that I'll be the politician,
[Amit Varma]: you'll be the general, and they'll kind of rule together.
[Amit Varma]: And all that's gone.
[Amit Varma]: And both Yahya and Bhutto now sort of collude to stop Mujib from taking over.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me about, you know, those months when that collusion is active.
[Guest]: Yeah, so that effectively happens between January and late March 1971 is the period
[Guest]: of post election sort of wrangling and negotiations.
[Guest]: In a sense, stuff which would never have happened, I mean, in any parliamentary democracy, the
[Guest]: only job for Yahya Khan would have been to sort of convene the sort of National Assembly
[Guest]: and they also wanted to have a Constituent Assembly and so on, you know, whatever it
[Guest]: was Mujibur Rahman should have been invited to form the government.
[Guest]: But instead of that, they sort of tried to get Mujibur Rahman to accept what the outlines
[Guest]: of a future constitutional settlement would be primarily with a view to securing the army's
[Guest]: own role and getting assurances from him before anything else could be done.
[Guest]: And those negotiations then sort of went nowhere.
[Guest]: And in that time, Bhutto very quickly insinuated himself into the picture by saying that, you
[Guest]: know, he was not the army's favorite when this whole story began.
[Guest]: But by the time the sort of negotiations are kind of in the middle, Bhutto is able to play
[Guest]: spoiler by telling the army on the one hand that, listen, if you're going to do this kind
[Guest]: of a deal and allow them to come without assurances for the West Pakistanis and so on, it's going
[Guest]: to be a non-starter.
[Guest]: So he's on the one hand, raising the stakes constantly.
[Guest]: But on the other hand, he's also giving them indications saying that, listen, we cannot
[Guest]: adopt what he calls a Turkish model at that point of time, right, I mean, Turkey's a sort
[Guest]: of example of the Islamic country that, you know, they sort of wanted to be, which is
[Guest]: that to say that, you know, you have the military, but you also have civilians and, you know,
[Guest]: you have some kind of a modesty when I working out at that point of time.
[Guest]: And so, in a sense, effectively, Yahya and the military regime and Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto
[Guest]: converge towards this point where they finally come to a decision that, you know, Mujibur
[Guest]: Rahman has to be stopped in his tracks, and that this moment for the creation of, you
[Guest]: know, a new polity where Mujib and the Awami League would play such an important role,
[Guest]: and the Punjabis and the West Pakistan military, etc, is going to be downgraded in its importance,
[Guest]: should not be allowed to pass.
[Guest]: And it's at that moment that, you know, things really start going downhill.
[Amit Varma]: And in fact, there's a funky quote a little when the crisis is a little later on, probably
[Amit Varma]: from March, where a senior general tells Yahya Khan, quote, don't worry, we won't allow these
[Amit Varma]: black bastards to rule over us, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And it's very clear even at that point that Yahya doesn't want to sort of respect the
[Amit Varma]: democratic expression and, you know, he's trying to control the process.
[Amit Varma]: What is the outcome he's actually aiming for?
[Guest]: I mean, I think, I mean, it's again difficult to say, because, you know, nowhere is it very
[Guest]: clearly laid down.
[Guest]: These were all things which were done under the guise of coming up with some kind of a
[Guest]: constitutional arrangement and so on.
[Guest]: But I think what Yahya would have been sort of quite satisfied with was a, if you know,
[Guest]: you came up with some structure where he remained president, where the army's budgets and its
[Guest]: control over sort of, you know, various kinds of important policy issues remained outside
[Guest]: the purview of democratic politics.
[Guest]: And then basically, you know, as long as Sayyed Mujib was willing to, you know, take on board
[Guest]: some, you know, West Pakistani sort of representation in his government and so on.
[Guest]: So, in a sense, those were the kinds of things that he wanted to do.
[Guest]: But in effect, all of that would have meant, from Mujib's standpoint, a significant dilution
[Guest]: of the issues on which the election were fought and won by the Awami League.
[Amit Varma]: Especially because, you know, now because of the radicalism of a lot of his support,
[Amit Varma]: the student movement and all of that, he's kind of forced into a corner where he has
[Amit Varma]: to insist on the six point charter that he laid out for Bangladeshi autonomy as a minimum
[Amit Varma]: condition that without that he cannot proceed.
[Amit Varma]: And he's kind of forced into this corner.
[Amit Varma]: And obviously, the army cannot accept that either, because Yaya, self-interest, he's
[Amit Varma]: trying to, you know, consolidate his own position.
[Amit Varma]: And on the side, you have Bhutto playing Yaya.
[Amit Varma]: And I presume there's a fair degree of sort of West Pakistani, Urdu speaking, condescension
[Amit Varma]: towards these, you know, these Bangladeshi, Bengali, East Pakistanis.
[Guest]: That's right.
[Guest]: I mean, I think that cultural angle of it comes out quite clearly in the quote that
[Guest]: you mentioned.
[Guest]: You know, that there is a strong condescension of Bengalis as somehow being culturally, physically,
[Guest]: and in every way inferior to the sort of, you know, the West Pakistanis and so on, particularly
[Guest]: the Punjabis.
[Guest]: So, there was very much that angle to it.
[Guest]: And in fact, that was part of the reason why once the military crackdown began, you know,
[Guest]: some of it is really hard, because that kind of ethnic angle to, you know, that story becomes
[Guest]: much more important once the crackdown begins.
[Amit Varma]: And how do those events play out like around March 71?
[Amit Varma]: How do events take Mujib from a position of still trying to negotiate with Yaya Khan to
[Amit Varma]: actually going ahead and declaring independence?
[Guest]: Well, the reality is that, you know, the convening of the National Assembly is postponed, adjourned,
[Guest]: sine die, you know, for, you know, without a sort of any date that then leads to a sort
[Guest]: of upsurge on the streets in Bangladesh.
[Guest]: And from that point on, Mujib has to play a careful role, right?
[Guest]: So, on the one hand, he has to keep the momentum and the upsurge going, because it allows him
[Guest]: to put pressure on the West Pakistanis.
[Guest]: But at the same time, he doesn't want to be in a position where the Pakistan army believes
[Guest]: that the situation is getting so out of control, that the only option is to use force to sort
[Guest]: of put them down.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: So, he's trying to sort of balance both of these.
[Guest]: There are other problems as well, in a sense that there are non-Bengalis in East Pakistan
[Guest]: who are being targeted by the Bengalis, as partly because they were seen as Tujus.
[Guest]: So there's another one more layer of ethnic complexity to this.
[Guest]: Many of these are Urdu speaking migrants from Eastern India, like Bihar and other parts
[Guest]: of Eastern India and so on.
[Guest]: So, he has to keep those kinds of, you know, violence and that kind of tendencies under
[Guest]: check.
[Guest]: So, it's a very difficult time for him.
[Guest]: And this is also the time when he's tentatively sending feelers to India saying, listen, you
[Guest]: know, if the Indians were to sort of, you know, make some noises and tell the Pakistanis
[Guest]: that, you know, we will disapprove of any use of force, etc., then, you know, maybe
[Guest]: the Pakistanis will back off.
[Guest]: So, and then he's trying to tell similar things to the Americans.
[Guest]: So, Mujib is trying pretty much everything, trick in the book to make sure that he can
[Guest]: come out of the situation, either, you know, with a sort of mandate to form government
[Guest]: or at least some kind of a power sharing arrangement without tipping over into violence.
[Guest]: And that is what is his thing.
[Guest]: But the Pakistanis are very clear that, at least from about the first week of March onwards,
[Guest]: that talks are simply a fig leaf behind which, a smoke screen behind which they will carry
[Guest]: on the military buildup.
[Guest]: There was not that much of Pakistani military presence in what later became Bangladesh.
[Guest]: They had to sort of do a buildup.
[Guest]: That buildup was also kind of a little difficult for them to do because India and Pakistan,
[Guest]: because their own sort of problems, Indians had shut off their airspace to Pakistani.
[Guest]: So the Pakistanis had to do that buildup by going through Sri Lanka, you know, so Colombo
[Guest]: was a transit point between the two wings.
[Guest]: So, all of that took a little bit of time.
[Guest]: And of course, they wanted to keep the element of surprise and they decided that when they
[Amit Varma]: would crack down, they would hit really hard.
[Amit Varma]: And Jaya was kind of pretending that he's still interested in talks with Mujib while
[Amit Varma]: on the one hand, the military buildup is proceeding and he knows he's going to crack down.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, Operation Searchlight, as it's called, starts on March 25th.
[Amit Varma]: At what point does it become an inevitability that it is going to happen?
[Guest]: There's no telling.
[Guest]: Well, I think already, you know, a few days before that it is becoming, you know, in fact,
[Guest]: in those few days, if you just look at the records of the negotiations which are happening,
[Guest]: it seems as if great progress is being made, you know, and in fact, you know, there's a
[Guest]: lot of sense.
[Guest]: And in fact, Mujib's own sort of trusted lieutenants within the Awami League are very conflicted
[Guest]: about how this is going to play.
[Guest]: Because on the one hand, it suddenly seems like, you know, progress is happening.
[Guest]: So you know, you don't want to sort of, you know, unnecessarily sort of burn that bridge.
[Guest]: You want to try and see if things can sort of move on.
[Guest]: But at the same time, you know, they have their own doubts and concerns.
[Guest]: And in fact, just around the time when the operation begins, you know, people tell Mujib
[Guest]: and Rahman that, listen, you have to sort of basically leave the country.
[Guest]: And Mujib takes a call saying that, you know, if he sort of flees, then the Pakistanis are
[Guest]: going to really get after his people.
[Guest]: And he says that, no, you know, it's just not possible for me to sort of take that kind
[Guest]: of a move.
[Amit Varma]: And then he's captured by the Pakistanis.
[Amit Varma]: Is that a principle stand or is he sort of just or he underestimates the inevitability
[Amit Varma]: of the military crackdown?
[Guest]: Well, I mean, at that point, by that point of time, you know, by the time this kind of
[Guest]: discussion is happening, the military crackdown is already underway.
[Amit Varma]: So he just chooses to.
[Guest]: So he just chooses to say that, listen, instead of making it, you know, his own survival and
[Guest]: issue on which the Pakistanis will crack down very hard on the rest of the Bengali people,
[Guest]: it is better that, you know, he sort of takes a stand and decides what he wants to do and
[Guest]: so on.
[Amit Varma]: So we'll take a quick break at this point and we'll come back to talk about India and
[Unknown]: the rest of the world.
[Unknown]: But
[Unknown]: also joins in to talk about his discovery of a bazaar.
[Unknown]: You should also check out episode 350 of Cyrus Says, which was an AMA special. It featured
[Unknown]: a roundtable of other IBM hosts like Varun Duggirala of Advertising Instead, Naren Chinoy
[Unknown]: from Simplified, Dinkar Divedi from Geekfruit, and of course me and Abbas.
[Unknown]: Anirudh Kanishkanti is back with season 2 of Echoes of India from the 27th of March.
[Unknown]: On the first episode of the season, Anirudh is going to start from where he left off,
[Unknown]: The Rise of the Gupta Empire, new episodes are out every Wednesday.
[Unknown]: On Puliyabazi, Pranay and Saurabh talk to Disha Malik and Kavita Devi, who run Khabar
[Unknown]: Lahariya, a women-run rural media network in UP.
[Unknown]: On Know Your Kanu, Ambarana is joined by wife and model Hasleen Kaur to talk about the safety
[Unknown]: of women in the entertainment industry.
[Unknown]: On Football Twirl, Saru and Kanov talk about last week's FA Cup and EPL action as a race
[Unknown]: for the title and top four heats up.
[Unknown]: On Thalle Harate last week, Uday Kumar joins host Pawan and Ganesh to discuss the oldest
[Unknown]: inscription thrown in Bengaluru, which opens the historical understanding of the city.
[Unknown]: On The Sponge Podcast, Ambi Parmeshwaran talks about the time when he was invited to present
[Unknown]: tax collection and communication strategies.
[Unknown]: And with that, let's continue on with your show.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the Scene and Nuancy and I'm chatting with Srinath Raghavan about his brilliant
[Amit Varma]: book 1971, which examines the Bangladesh war and all the multiple factors which led to
[Amit Varma]: it happening, which wasn't at all inevitable.
[Amit Varma]: And so far, we've kind of been speaking about the domestic situation in Pakistan, as it
[Amit Varma]: then was because it was West Pakistan and East Pakistan and Bangladesh didn't exist
[Amit Varma]: at the time.
[Amit Varma]: And now let's talk a little bit about India, Srinath.
[Amit Varma]: So Mujib decides that, okay, he's going to let himself be arrested and so on.
[Amit Varma]: But many of his lieutenants escaped to India.
[Amit Varma]: And all through this crisis, as it's been building up, what's been sort of India's attitude
[Guest]: towards the Bangladesh question?
[Guest]: So the Indian government is obviously tracking the situation very closely, particularly after
[Guest]: the election results come out, because they know that the outcome of the elections is
[Guest]: something that the Pakistani West Pakistani political establishment and the Pakistan army
[Guest]: certainly are going to be extremely unhappy with.
[Guest]: And they know that there is a possibility of some kind of a sort of, you know, a breakdown
[Guest]: of talks entirely.
[Guest]: So that that is very much in the realm of possibility.
[Guest]: But at least broadly speaking, within the government of India, there are kind of differing
[Guest]: views, right?
[Guest]: So on the one hand, the Ministry of External Affairs and the Pakistan High Commissioner,
[Guest]: their view is that in some ways, actually speaking, Mujib and the Pakistan army will
[Guest]: make a deal.
[Guest]: And that's not such a bad thing for us at all, because it's better for us to have a
[Guest]: Bengali Awami-like sort of prime minister in position than having military rule in Pakistan.
[Guest]: Their stances on a range of issues, which sort of were of most concern to India, like
[Guest]: Kashmir, etc, were seen as much more sort of moderate and acceptable.
[Guest]: But then, you know, the Indian intelligence agencies, particularly the newly created research
[Guest]: and analysis wing, the R&DW, which was headed by a man called Arun Kaur, who was a sort
[Guest]: of first, you know, person, you know, and the intelligence agencies, however, felt that
[Guest]: the possibility of a total breakdown and some kind of a resort to armed struggle by the
[Guest]: Bengali people and the Awami League's base was not something to be discounted.
[Guest]: So there were these kind of two contending views.
[Guest]: The other thing the Indians are concerned is that, you know, maybe in order to divert
[Guest]: attention from what is happening in East Pakistan, Yahya Khan might take some kind of military
[Guest]: action in the West, just as a sort of a diversionary thing, and so on, right?
[Guest]: I mean, so there are all these kinds of things happening.
[Guest]: Now, around the 2nd of March or so, just when the talks are kind of, it's looking like these
[Guest]: things are not going anywhere, the Indians get a couple of feelers from Mujibur Rahman
[Guest]: asking them to, you know, make some sort of military mobilization, etc, in order to put
[Guest]: the fear into the Pakistani minds and then prevent them from sort of deploying troops
[Guest]: into Pakistan and so on.
[Guest]: And Mujib even meets the Indian Deputy High Commissioner in Dhaka to convey the point.
[Guest]: But the Indians are still very unsure about what exactly Mujibur Rahman's sort of thinking
[Guest]: on these issues is.
[Guest]: Now, again, it's important to remind ourselves that from the perspective of Indian decision
[Guest]: makers at that time, Mujibur Rahman was a Pakistani politician.
[Guest]: You know, in a sense, obviously, they knew him and had some contacts with him.
[Guest]: But ever since Mujib had sort of gotten embroiled in this thing called the Agartala conspiracy
[Guest]: case, you know, where he was alleged to have sort of, you know, waged a conspiracy to sort
[Guest]: of, you know, break up Pakistan, etc, the Indians have been quite wary of being openly
[Guest]: sort of in contact with him and so on.
[Guest]: So there is a period when Mujibur Rahman actually attempts to reach out, but the Indian political
[Guest]: reaction is a little confused.
[Guest]: And again, the Indians are reading this development towards the last week before the crackdown
[Guest]: as the situation is actually improving, right?
[Guest]: That's everyone, including the army leaders thought things were kind of getting better.
[Guest]: So as with any such situation, you know, you have sort of conflicting assessments of what
[Guest]: is likely to happen.
[Guest]: So in a sense, the Indians were also a little sort of surprised when the crackdown actually
[Guest]: took place.
[Guest]: So it was not something that they were absolutely sure was what the next step was going to be.
[Amit Varma]: And it's kind of complicated by the fact that they would like Mujib to be Prime Minister
[Amit Varma]: of Pakistan for the reasons you discussed, but they're not so sure about Bangladesh.
[Amit Varma]: So it's a sort of, you know, they haven't yet reached the stage where the, you know,
[Amit Varma]: an independent Bangladesh is not necessarily in Indian wishes.
[Amit Varma]: Why invite chaos in the neighborhood?
[Amit Varma]: And also, you know, I think you mentioned there was a bit of a fear that an independent
[Amit Varma]: Bangladesh, the leftist elements might get closer to the Chinese than to the Soviets.
[Amit Varma]: And then that just complicates the geopolitics of the whole thing.
[Guest]: Not just geopolitics, but also India's own domestic politics.
[Guest]: The Indian government at that time was cracking down very heavily on the Naxalite movement,
[Guest]: which was of course, in West Bengal was one of the main areas where that was happening.
[Guest]: So there was this concern that, you know, student and Naxal radicals in Indian part
[Guest]: of Bengal might team up with those on the other side and so on.
[Guest]: But I think more fundamentally, you know, at that point of time, it is still too premature
[Guest]: to think of an independent Bangladesh.
[Guest]: And again, that's where, you know, we have to allow for the distancing from the hindsight.
[Guest]: You know, what looks like obviously the right solution to us was not at all something which
[Guest]: was easily conceivable.
[Guest]: You're talking of breaking up another country and, you know, and that meant that, you know,
[Guest]: the movement on the ground had to have the force.
[Guest]: I mean, the Indians always, you know, they had to assess first whether the Awami League
[Guest]: was serious.
[Guest]: What was its leadership in the absence of Mujibur Rahman?
[Guest]: How much could you sort of trust the others to sort of carry on the struggle?
[Guest]: Did they have the moral and physical sort of, you know, reserves to be able to go on
[Guest]: even if India provided material support, right?
[Guest]: So all of these issues were still to be debated, thought.
[Guest]: So you know, assuming that the choices only between either acquiescing in a Pakistani
[Guest]: crackdown or plumping for independence of Bangladesh, I think is a very dichotomous
[Guest]: choice which just was not in people's minds at that point of time.
[Amit Varma]: And was also partly complicated by sort of India taking the high moral ground when it
[Amit Varma]: came to Kashmir and saying, hey, this is only our internal matter and no one else must interfere.
[Amit Varma]: And having taken this stance, it would now be very awkward for them to interfere in Pakistan's
[Guest]: internal matter, as it were.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So when the first Bangladeshi politicians from the Awami League started coming into
[Guest]: India, established contact with the Indian security forces, the BSF, you know, and the
[Guest]: R&DW and others, the Indians were still unsure whether they should be sort of seen as actively
[Guest]: intervening in this.
[Guest]: For one, this whole principle of non-interference, which is a kind of an established position
[Guest]: of India in this whole story.
[Guest]: The second reason why the Indians were not so sure that they should be able to, they
[Guest]: should actually sort of intervene in this issue in any serious way was because they
[Guest]: were just unsure of what the sort of movement would look like in the absence of a leader
[Guest]: like Mujibur Rahman.
[Guest]: You know, you had to sort of make some assessment about whether this would be a movement which
[Guest]: was capable of actually sort of pushing towards independence in a serious way.
[Guest]: And the third thing, of course, was that already by that time, there was a big hue and cry
[Guest]: in the Indian parliament and so on, saying that, you know, India has to sort of act and
[Guest]: such like things.
[Amit Varma]: And it's interesting that, you know, this Indira Gandhi in the aftermath of the Bangladesh
[Amit Varma]: war was, of course, praised hyperbolically by one opposition person as Madhurga.
[Guest]: It's difficult to figure out where exactly he said that, but it's now part of the common
[Amit Varma]: lore.
[Amit Varma]: It's part of the common folklore.
[Amit Varma]: So it doesn't matter if it happened or not, it happened.
[Amit Varma]: And the interesting thing in your book is that she's actually also very reluctant to
[Amit Varma]: kind of get involved, like exactly as you're saying, she's very wary.
[Amit Varma]: And at one point, she remarks to someone that there must be, you know, most of parliament
[Amit Varma]: wants her to act against Bangladesh and only it'll be hard to find a couple of people who
[Amit Varma]: will actually support her stance on it.
[Amit Varma]: And she's playing this very careful role.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, while India isn't actively thinking of an independent Bangladesh or moving
[Amit Varma]: in to make that happen, the army is still providing support to sort of the rebels and
[Amit Varma]: the militants outside.
[Amit Varma]: What is the sort of thinking behind that?
[Amit Varma]: Like first saying, we don't want to get involved, it's your internal matter, God knows what
[Amit Varma]: will happen.
[Amit Varma]: And but then actually still helping the rebellion.
[Guest]: Well, in fact, the help on the ground happens even before these political decisions started
[Unknown]: to be made.
[Guest]: The reality is that these are people who are fleeing military sort of attacks and coming
[Guest]: across the border.
[Guest]: They're not just ordinary citizens, but also let's remember, you know, there are units
[Guest]: of the Bangladesh Pakistan army, which is the Bengali regiments, which also sort of
[Guest]: come onto the Indian side, right?
[Guest]: So that's that then becomes the nucleus of what would later become the main fighting
[Guest]: force that you would use.
[Guest]: So and then, you know, many of them wanted sort of various kinds of assistance in order
[Guest]: to come together.
[Guest]: There are senior army leaders, apart from Ujjain Bur Rahman, were trickling into India
[Guest]: from various parts.
[Guest]: So in a sense, not responding to any of that was also not an option.
[Guest]: But at the same time, I think the initial Indian feeling was very much that, you know,
[Guest]: you just, yes, you sort of bring them in, you sort of create some kind of structures
[Guest]: to, you know, accommodate them in camps and various kinds of things.
[Guest]: But that will also then allow you to keep a lid on what is happening, right?
[Guest]: It's not necessarily the case that you're already thinking of them as being, in fact,
[Guest]: you know, the decision to sort of really scale up support to the, you know, the army and
[Guest]: the Bengali fighters doesn't happen until later in the summer of 1971.
[Guest]: In fact, some of the notes which are made by the R&DW, because they were the ones who
[Guest]: were directly dealing with many of these people, suggest a great degree of unhappiness with
[Guest]: India in the early months, you know, especially in May, June, July, saying Indians are not
[Guest]: giving us enough ammunition, they have rationed us to five rounds a day and so on.
[Guest]: All of that was, you know, partly because of material constraints on the part of India,
[Guest]: but also partly because you did not really think that, you know, you wanted to sort of
[Guest]: scale up support in that way.
[Guest]: It's only in those months that the idea really begins that, yes, we have to sort of systematically
[Guest]: start doing these, you establish training camps.
[Guest]: So everything happens somewhat gradually.
[Guest]: And Mrs. Gandhi and PN Huxar and others are genuinely quite cautious about what should
[Guest]: be done, right?
[Guest]: In fact, there is another sort of folklore around this is this claim by General Maniksha,
[Guest]: you know, well after Mrs. Gandhi's death, you know, he's said in public quite a few
[Guest]: times that Mrs. Gandhi actually called him to a cabinet meeting and said that, listen,
[Guest]: why can't the army go into Bangladesh now?
[Guest]: He says it's in May 1971.
[Guest]: And then he said that, no, no, no, we have to wait, the army has to be prepared, the
[Guest]: monsoons have to get over, then we will sort of go in.
[Guest]: So, you know, and then she agreed, but, you know, that's a piece of myth making, which
[Guest]: I think does very little credit to any of the people involved.
[Amit Varma]: And for all the myth making of both Mrs. Gandhi and Maniksha as sort of hawks and these brave
[Amit Varma]: figures, even Maniksha was fairly reluctant in the sense that, you know, just before the
[Amit Varma]: war starts, it's like he doesn't want to go all the way to Dhaka and he's one of them,
[Amit Varma]: he's one of the people who's kind of arguing for restraint, just taking enough territory
[Amit Varma]: to send the migrants back and its junior officers, like a gentleman named Jacob, who sort of
[Amit Varma]: say that, no, no, it's very much within the realm of possibility.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So, yeah.
[Guest]: So, you know, we'll talk about that aspect of it in a little bit.
[Guest]: But at this point of time, I think, you know, this point is worth making because this is
[Guest]: the most commonly held notion in India that Indira Gandhi actually sort of wanted to,
[Guest]: you know, or would have asked Maniksha to sort of do this, but actually it's untrue.
[Guest]: In fact, right from the very beginning, from the day the crackdown begins, the thinking
[Guest]: of Mrs. Gandhi is shaped quite decisively by P. N. Aksar, who's our closest advisor
[Guest]: on these matters, and who's a very experienced diplomat, and who makes it quite clear to
[Guest]: her that, you know, we should not be seen as overtly sort of intervening in the affairs
[Guest]: of Pakistan, and that if anything, we have to create the ground for the movement to become
[Guest]: stronger and for India to then act decisively if necessary.
[Guest]: And the position that we should take is that the influx of all of these refugees into India,
[Guest]: the number becomes something like close to 10 million by the end of the summer, is an
[Guest]: unacceptable situation for a country like ours, and conditions have to be created in
[Guest]: Bangladesh where those people go back.
[Guest]: And in fact, what is also clear from the documents that are now available is that Mrs. Gandhi,
[Guest]: even before that putative meeting with the army chief, actually calls her, you know,
[Guest]: the leaders of the opposition and briefs them saying that, please do not make this an issue.
[Guest]: This is something that is best sort of, you know, you should trust us, we will keep you
[Guest]: informed and, you know, leaders like Adil B. Haribachpai sort of actually go along at
[Guest]: that point of time.
[Guest]: But it is also true that there were sections within the Congress party, including her own
[Guest]: cabinet, people who believe that the, you know, the anger amongst Indian people on this
[Guest]: was such that, you know, you had to do something and, you know, this is a moment to act and
[Guest]: so on.
[Guest]: And it's in that context that Mrs. Gandhi actually calls in Maniksha for the meeting,
[Guest]: primarily to let her colleagues hear from the army chief what is it that he thinks is
[Guest]: the military assessment.
[Guest]: So I don't think it's at all true that Mrs. Gandhi wanted a precipitated invasion and
[Guest]: that she was persuaded otherwise by Maniksha.
[Amit Varma]: And part of what seems to force her hand and change her mind, and again, it shows how contingency
[Amit Varma]: plays a role is not just the amount of migration into India from Bangladesh, but the composition
[Amit Varma]: of it, like you point out how early on when migrants first came, when refugees started
[Amit Varma]: coming in, they were majority Muslim, basically the same demographic as Bangladesh itself.
[Amit Varma]: But gradually, as the numbers grew to 5 million, and then to alarmingly to 8 million, and beyond,
[Amit Varma]: as you point out, where the sheer number of refugees, number one became a logistical impossibility
[Amit Varma]: and a huge fiscal burden on India.
[Amit Varma]: But also it was now 80% Hindu 20% Muslim, which therefore indicated that those Hindus
[Amit Varma]: were fleeing in large numbers, because there was a genocide underway, and that the human
[Amit Varma]: rights violations, which people sort of had a sense of were far graver than people had
[Amit Varma]: suspected.
[Amit Varma]: And in a sense, the combination of the fiscal burden of taking care of all these refugees
[Amit Varma]: forced Indira Gandhi into a stand where she had to insist that number one, the refugees
[Amit Varma]: have to go back, but number two, because there's a genocide underway till you find a political
[Amit Varma]: solution within Pakistan, you can't possibly go back, send them back.
[Amit Varma]: And a lot of the other nations of the world, which we will come to, but in the foreign,
[Amit Varma]: in the international arena, refused to accept that these two could be tied together.
[Amit Varma]: They were like, sort of saying that, yeah, you have a migration problem will help you
[Amit Varma]: with that in a humanitarian sense.
[Amit Varma]: But this is not tied to the political problem where Indira Gandhi clearly saw that it was.
[Guest]: Well, it and it was in practical terms, because you are talking about a number like 10 million
[Guest]: refugees coming on to a country like India, which was already a pretty poor country at
[Guest]: that point of time.
[Guest]: I mean, we only have to look at the scale of say Syrian refugee influx into Europe today,
[Guest]: and the kind of unrest that it has done in European politics, right?
[Guest]: I mean, what do you expect a poor country like India to be able to do?
[Guest]: A place like Tripura, suddenly had three times the number of migrants as the total number
[Guest]: of population in that state.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: I mean, so it was a demographic sort of
[Unknown]: But they will go back, I mean
[Guest]: So, yes, I mean, so that's again part of the sort of afterlife of 1971 crisis.
[Guest]: And, you know, even in the context of Assam, we are still facing all of those things, right?
[Guest]: Saying how many people went, what is the right date and so on.
[Guest]: So, some of that is there.
[Guest]: But for the Indians, the key thing was to try and keep these people under reasonably
[Guest]: sort of controlled conditions, so that you would ensure their eventual repatriation back
[Guest]: to Bangladesh.
[Guest]: So, that angle of it, the line that, you know, conditions have to be created such that people
[Guest]: can go back was a very carefully chosen one, because the only imperative way that people
[Guest]: have to go back.
[Guest]: What those conditions would be was left for Pakistan and the international community and
[Guest]: everyone else to sort of help arrive at, right?
[Guest]: If Pakistanis sort of chose to come to some kind of a modest way and die with Mujib and,
[Guest]: you know, came with some solution, and the refugees could go back, maybe the Indians
[Guest]: would have been fine.
[Guest]: If not, they would go back to an independent country, right?
[Guest]: I mean, but that transition had to happen over a period of time.
[Guest]: So, that was one major consideration, right, which is that just the sheer number of sort
[Guest]: of people.
[Guest]: The second thing is about this, you know, the number of sort of Hindu refugees which
[Guest]: came in, which again is a number which the Indian government never ever during that crisis
[Guest]: revealed that there were so many Hindus, partly because they believed that if this was revealed,
[Guest]: it would lead to a backlash against Muslims in India.
[Guest]: And again, we had seen that dynamic in older migrations, you know, 1950, there was a crisis
[Guest]: between East Pakistan and West Bengal, you know, and then so on.
[Guest]: So, she was very keen not to allow those kinds of things to happen.
[Guest]: But at the same time, the other danger was that, you know, Hindu-Bengalis, you know,
[Guest]: could sort of, you know, if they sort of melted into local populations would then be even
[Guest]: more difficult to sort of identify than Muslim-Bengalis, right?
[Guest]: I mean, so, in that sense, you know, you were concerned about what would be the aftermath
[Guest]: of this kind of refugee flows and so on.
[Guest]: So, there was this range of considerations for which, you know, by the summer of 1971,
[Guest]: the Indian government comes to this conclusion that the best way is to mount a big international
[Guest]: diplomatic campaign to get the big powers to put pressure on Pakistan to create conditions
[Guest]: under which this would happen.
[Guest]: And the Indians were very careful never to specify what is it that they wanted.
[Guest]: Because again, you know, you didn't want to be seen as interfering in Pakistan's internal
[Guest]: affairs.
[Guest]: But gradually by that summer, the opinion is shifting to saying that in the face of
[Guest]: continued Pakistani reluctance and intransigence and refusal to either stop military operations
[Guest]: or to move towards a political settlement, the possibility of a united Pakistan sticking
[Amit Varma]: together is getting increasingly remote.
[Amit Varma]: And it's interesting how this is driven partly by Indira Gandhi just being very principled
[Amit Varma]: against the human rights violation and the genocide and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And also the very admirable stance she takes to not reveal the numbers of Hindus because
[Amit Varma]: she wants to, you know, I'm a huge critic of Indira Gandhi, especially because of her
[Amit Varma]: disastrous economic policies, many of which I consider a crime on humanity.
[Amit Varma]: But I have to say she comes out looking very good in this book for some of the decisions
[Amit Varma]: she's taken.
[Amit Varma]: But equally, a lot of her imperatives are just practical imperatives, there are too
[Amit Varma]: many refugees, India doesn't have the money, it needs to get something done.
[Amit Varma]: And she talks of this political solution again in vague terms and very correctly not specifying
[Amit Varma]: anything because it's not her prerogative to do so.
[Amit Varma]: So Pakistan to sort out its internal affairs.
[Amit Varma]: At this point in time, you know, as the summer proceeds, is there any possibility of such
[Amit Varma]: a political solution or has that ship sailed?
[Guest]: Well, that ship has sailed partly because the crackdown continues until quite late,
[Guest]: which is why the numbers are increasing as you go along through the summer.
[Guest]: But the possibility is also receding because the main power, external power, which could
[Guest]: have done something in this context, the United States of America under Richard Nixon, which
[Guest]: had significant sort of stakes in their relations with Pakistan was totally unwilling to do
[Guest]: anything to do with Pakistan.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: And hence, Nixon, you know, in a famous instruction to his sort of, you know, White House staff
[Guest]: and the, you know, the State Department, etc. says, do not squeeze Yaya, right?
[Guest]: This is what he writes on the margins of a note.
[Guest]: And the reason he does not want to squeeze Yaya is because Yaya is very important to
[Guest]: him at this point of time, because the United States wants to reach out to Maoist China,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: And they don't have, those countries don't have a relationship.
[Guest]: And China is kind of, you know, Pakistan is acting as a conduit through which messages
[Guest]: are being sent by the Nixon White House.
[Guest]: And I must say it's the White House, because, you know, Nixon is, all of this is clandestine
[Amit Varma]: and hidden even from other parts of the US government at that time, the State Department.
[Amit Varma]: It's really funny how Nixon and Kissinger are sort of one party here and the State Department
[Amit Varma]: is another party.
[Guest]: It's like completely, they're antagonists.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: No, no, because they believe that if, if the news of such an attempt leaked out, there
[Guest]: would be such a political backlash that they would not be able to go through with it.
[Guest]: So they wanted to keep it totally secret.
[Guest]: And of course, Nixon and Kissinger were, you know, legendary sort of secretive, furtive
[Guest]: sort of characters.
[Guest]: And you know, the modus operandi was basically that Henry Kissinger would call in the Pakistani
[Guest]: ambassador in Washington and hand him a note.
[Guest]: The ambassador would then relate over secret cables to Islamabad.
[Guest]: In Islamabad, the foreign office would call the sort of Chinese ambassador and relate
[Guest]: to him.
[Guest]: And he would in turn then relate to Beijing.
[Guest]: And then vice versa, the messages used to come down the truth.
[Guest]: So this was a sort of complicated arrangement.
[Guest]: And it was in, you know, the summer of 1971 that Henry Kissinger was to make his sort
[Guest]: of secret pathbreaking visit to meet the Chinese leadership.
[Guest]: So at least till that happened, the Americans were absolutely clear that they would not
[Guest]: want to put any pressure on the Pakistanis, which meant that there was hardly any serious
[Guest]: pressure going on the Yahya Khan regime at that point of time.
[Amit Varma]: We're really glad you finally got the US into this, because after talking about how your
[Amit Varma]: book is a strike against the insularity of the way we look at the Bangladesh affair,
[Amit Varma]: all we've done for more than an hour is speak about India and Pakistan and Bangladesh entirely
[Amit Varma]: my fault.
[Amit Varma]: Let's move on to the US now.
[Amit Varma]: I've already had a very illuminating episode with you on the US and South Asia and how
[Amit Varma]: those relations evolved over the period of time that will be linked in the episode page.
[Amit Varma]: So listeners can listen to that to get a broader sense of how the US viewed South Asia.
[Amit Varma]: But just to sort of give me a quick recap post independence, like the US's attitude
[Amit Varma]: in 1947 in dealing with South Asia very much was to just follow the British lead because
[Amit Varma]: there are allies, you know, they've been there, they know the ground situation, we'll do whatever
[Amit Varma]: they say.
[Guest]: How does it evolve from there?
[Guest]: So effectively, that's the American policy from about 1947 till 1950 when the Korean
[Guest]: War begins, right?
[Guest]: So once the Korean War begins, the Americans are very concerned that the Soviet Union and
[Guest]: the communist bloc will sort of potentially carry out a similar kind of a strike in the
[Guest]: Persian Gulf, and, you know, in order to prevent that they needed allies who would sort of
[Guest]: line up against the Soviet Union and so on.
[Guest]: That then leads to the search for various kinds of allies and Pakistan is identified
[Guest]: as a significant other country alongside Turkey and Iran, which would form the sort of northern
[Guest]: tier against the Soviet Union.
[Guest]: And then the US Pakistan alliance is consummated in 1954.
[Guest]: But of course, the Americans very quickly start having second thoughts because they
[Guest]: realize that the Pakistanis are not in a position really to deliver on much of the story.
[Guest]: And so there is a tilt towards sort of, you know, redressing the balance vis-a-vis India
[Guest]: and Pakistan under John F. Kennedy initially.
[Guest]: And by the time the sort of Lyndon Johnson comes to power and you have around 1965 when
[Guest]: India and Pakistan are at war.
[Guest]: So Johnson is kind of fed up of, you know, United States having to mediate between India
[Guest]: and Pakistan over Kashmir and this and that.
[Guest]: And he basically takes a sort of a plague on both the houses kind of attitude and in
[Guest]: the 1965 war, the United States imposes an arms embargo on both India and Pakistan.
[Guest]: And of course, Pakistanis because they have more American kit are, you know, feel the
[Guest]: pinch stronger.
[Guest]: But after that, the United States kind of, you know, is more deeply involved in Vietnam.
[Guest]: There are these growing domestic sort of protests, you know, Johnson is kind of bogged down.
[Guest]: But when Richard Nixon comes to power, he is very keen to revive and resuscitate the
[Guest]: relationship with Pakistan.
[Guest]: Now let's remember, recall that Nixon was vice president under, you know, President
[Guest]: Eisenhower when the US Pakistan military alliance was signed.
[Guest]: So he was one of the original votaries of the relationship with Pakistan.
[Guest]: And he always believed, like many Americans share this common prejudice that Indians are
[Guest]: this weak effect, you know, useless, unreliable kind of people.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, I'm going to interrupt you and quote Nixon on India, where he describes Indians
[Amit Varma]: as quote, a slippery, treacherous people, devious and ruthlessly self-interested.
[Amit Varma]: And at various times, of course, he referred to Indira Gandhi as a bitch and a witch.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So, so there is, there is cultural condescension for the Indians, which as we spoke in the
[Guest]: last sort of podcast has a long history going back to sort of, you know, American impressions
[Guest]: of India in the 19th century.
[Guest]: And there is this extraordinary sort of gendered kind of approach towards dealing with someone
[Guest]: like Indira Gandhi, who they believe is, you know, can sort of be taken care of and such
[Guest]: like things.
[Guest]: So the Americans, when they come, when Nixon and Kissinger, you know, start formulating
[Guest]: this policy, so they want to sort of, first of all, rebalance towards Pakistan again.
[Guest]: Then they want to reach out to the Chinese and they decide that Pakistan can be one of
[Guest]: the two main conduits through which that will done.
[Guest]: And eventually that Pakistan channel becomes more important one.
[Guest]: And in that context, you know, they decide pretty much not to do.
[Guest]: And Nixon and Kissinger have this kind of totally insouciant attitude towards the whole
[Guest]: human rights question.
[Guest]: You know, both of them see themselves as very tough minded, realist kind of people that,
[Guest]: you know, at one point they say, listen, the British ruled this country of 300 million
[Guest]: people with, you know, just about 100,000 sort of white people out there.
[Guest]: You know, the Pakistanis can sort out the Bengalis and so on.
[Guest]: So there is a clear underestimation of the forces of nationalism and what the sort of
[Guest]: political sort of situation there was.
[Guest]: And of course, you know, despite being alerted to the scale of the genocidal violence, which
[Guest]: was taking place in Bangladesh, particularly by the sort of American deputy sort of, you
[Guest]: know, head of mission in Dhaka, a man called Archer Blood, who sends these telegrams, you
[Guest]: know, which have been covered very extensively in another very fine book by Gary Bass, which
[Guest]: I'd again recommend to all our sort of listeners to definitely read because it covers the American
[Guest]: sort of thing in very great detail, you know, but those telegrams don't even sort of make
[Guest]: a dent in terms of American policy.
[Guest]: In fact, you know, blood is kind of censured and pulled out of Dhaka and then cast into
[Guest]: sort of oblivion.
[Guest]: So that is the sort of line that the Americans take.
[Guest]: Political imperatives of reaching out to China trump the realities of this India-Pakistan
[Guest]: dynamic.
[Guest]: But, and of course, the human rights and, you know, the extraordinary sort of gross
[Guest]: violations of that in terms of murder of people, which is happening in Bangladesh.
[Guest]: And the only thing Americans are keen, however, from the very beginning is to make sure that
[Guest]: India does not attack Pakistan, because obviously they don't want their ally to be in trouble.
[Guest]: But at the same time, particularly after the sort of Kissinger comes to India in July 1971,
[Guest]: you know, has discussions with Indians and goes to Pakistan and famously feigns a Delhi
[Guest]: belly and, you know, takes the secret plane out to China.
[Guest]: And once he comes back, he basically tells the sort of Indians that, listen, you know,
[Guest]: we have this kind of, you know, informal sort of understanding going back to the 1962 war
[Guest]: that if there is something, you know, serious by China, you know, in terms of an attack
[Guest]: on India, the United States would sort of stand by India.
[Guest]: But if the Chinese intervene in an India-Pakistan war, then you cannot count on us to sort of
[Guest]: going through with that understanding.
[Guest]: And the Indians naturally see that as an attempt to tighten the screws on them, which is part
[Guest]: of Kissinger's sort of objective, very much so.
[Guest]: But the other thing which Kissinger is trying to do and the Nixon administration trying
[Guest]: to do is that they are trying to signal to the Chinese that, listen, we will stand by
[Guest]: our allies come what may, because at the end of the day, they are trying to establish a
[Guest]: new relationship with China, and they want to establish their sort of credibility as
[Guest]: a dependable sort of partner, or let alone an ally.
[Guest]: And then they feel that if they sort of let down Yaya Khan at the moment of this crisis,
[Guest]: the Chinese will say that, listen, who the hell is going to antagonize the Soviet Union,
[Guest]: depending on the Americans, right?
[Guest]: I mean, we might as well look after our own.
[Guest]: So that whole thing will come through.
[Guest]: So for a series of geopolitical imperatives, the Nixon administration effectively turns
[Amit Varma]: a blind eye to what's happening in the subcontinent.
[Amit Varma]: And China's very central to this, isn't it?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, is this again, part of the sort of the Cold War shifting shape that China is
[Amit Varma]: now fighting with the Soviet Union?
[Amit Varma]: And is that why the US sort of wants to draw closer to China?
[Amit Varma]: Because it's obviously in their interest, therefore, to have friendly relations with
[Guest]: China.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So the Sino-Soviet sort of relationship starts fraying from already the late 1950s, right,
[Guest]: from around the time of the Great Leap Forward.
[Guest]: So there are a range of factors which historians have studied, you know, there is ideology,
[Guest]: there's various kinds of, you know, conflicts of interest, and so on.
[Guest]: There's a sort of personality clash between Mao Zedong and the Chinese leadership, and
[Guest]: the Russian leadership, and so on.
[Guest]: But by 1969, that relationship and that hostility is actually militarized.
[Guest]: They have a disputed border along the Ussuri River, in which Chinese forces actually launch
[Guest]: an unprovoked attack on the Soviets, and then that leads to a clash.
[Guest]: And thereafter, Mao Zedong sort of panics and says that, you know, we've got to sort
[Guest]: of go into national mobilization mode, because there's going to be a surprise attack by
[Guest]: the Soviets, and so on.
[Guest]: So in fact, after the 1969 sort of clash, Sino-Soviet clash, it is the Chinese also
[Guest]: who look to the sort of, you know, finding some kind of relationship with the United
[Guest]: States, which will allow them to balance.
[Guest]: As far as the United States is concerned, and Nixon and Kissinger are concerned, their
[Guest]: primary consideration, of course, is one to sort of have a triangular relationship between
[Guest]: China, United States, and the Soviet Union.
[Guest]: So you bring the Soviet Union to balance.
[Guest]: But the larger sort of objective is to make sure that both these sets of somewhat independent
[Guest]: relationships will allow them to extricate without loss of face from Vietnam.
[Guest]: Because both the Soviets and the Chinese are on their own steam supporting the North Vietnamese.
[Guest]: So they believe that if the Soviets and the Chinese put pressure on the North Vietnamese,
[Guest]: that will allow for some kind of a face saving negotiated solution to come up and the Americans
[Guest]: can pull out.
[Guest]: So that really is the geopolitical imperative in play.
[Amit Varma]: So because of this sort of Nixon and Kissinger decide to go all in on Yaya Khan, but the
[Amit Varma]: State Department is of an entirely different view during this whole situation.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit about that.
[Amit Varma]: And what is kind of the genesis of the State Department's being relatively friendlier towards
[Guest]: India?
[Guest]: Well, as I said, Nixon and Kissinger were driven primarily by the high geopolitics of
[Amit Varma]: the Cold War and what they wanted to achieve.
[Amit Varma]: And they didn't tell the State Department they were reaching out to China secretly and
[Guest]: all that?
[Guest]: No, it was a secret.
[Guest]: It was all only known after Kissinger sort of goes there.
[Guest]: And even State Department officials were working within the Nixon White House and were in on
[Guest]: this very small circle of things, were told in no uncertain terms that, you know, the
[Guest]: Secretary of State or others should not be informed.
[Guest]: So it was a pretty extraordinary sort of bureaucratic, you know, arrangement in there.
[Guest]: But the State Department itself had regional experts, people who had been in the region
[Guest]: who understood something about what was happening.
[Guest]: They had people like Archibald who were sort of sending in telegrams.
[Guest]: They had a much better sort of sense of realities on the ground.
[Guest]: And they kept insisting that, you know, the Pakistani Army's attempt to impose a solution
[Guest]: by force was almost destined to fail because there were just too many Bengalis and not
[Guest]: enough force that you could use against all of them.
[Guest]: And, you know, in the context of third world nationalism, you know, this is not a game
[Guest]: which can be played to anybody's profit very easily.
[Guest]: And they kind of understood that basic truth.
[Guest]: But the reality was that even senior officials like Assistant Secretaries of State were basically
[Guest]: shot down by Kissinger in interdepartmental sort of meetings and convenings and so on.
[Guest]: And we're constantly reminded that, listen, the President is very keen that we should
[Guest]: not, you know, do down Yahya and so on and saying that, you know, I just don't understand
[Guest]: what kind of an administration this is that, you know, the President wants something and
[Guest]: you hear you are so-called experts who are sort of holding forth on a totally different
[Guest]: policy line.
[Guest]: So Kissinger was really cracking the whip on them, you know, in a very serious way.
[Guest]: So the State Department officials who knew better in some ways were marginalized, again,
[Guest]: partly because, you know, it just didn't serve the larger geopolitical ambitions, which the
[Amit Varma]: Nixon administration had at that point of time.
[Amit Varma]: So now, was the US during this point, moving closer to actively intervening to make sure
[Amit Varma]: India stays out?
[Amit Varma]: Because they obviously want to be seen by China for the sake of their credibility as
[Amit Varma]: helping Pakistan out.
[Amit Varma]: They also want a united Pakistan through all of this and they're expecting Yahya to get
[Amit Varma]: things back together.
[Amit Varma]: And they're worried and they know that India is sort of helping the insurgents on the border
[Amit Varma]: and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, that's that's kind of open knowledge.
[Guest]: No, in fact, there is a very interesting, you know, CIA document, which I came across
[Guest]: while researching the book, where in April 1971, the CIA tells the, you know, they report
[Guest]: up the channel saying that Indians have actually approached them saying that, you know, they
[Guest]: want some weapons which they can pass on to the Indian rebels.
[Guest]: So this was, as you can imagine, the intelligence community.
[Amit Varma]: How did you come across CIA documents?
[Amit Varma]: Like were these like declassified?
[Guest]: Yeah, so the good thing about the American system is that, you know, for all the crimes
[Guest]: committed by Richard Nixon in that period, a lot of material is very much out there.
[Guest]: In fact, you know, it's quite remarkable.
[Guest]: Is it on the internet?
[Amit Varma]: Can I see it?
[Guest]: Oh, yeah.
[Guest]: In fact, there's a, you know, I'm not sure if that there is an organization called nixontapes.org,
[Guest]: which was dedicated towards transcribing a lot of tapes, because, you know, one of the
[Guest]: things which Richard Nixon did, which nobody actually expected him to do, was to tape pretty
[Guest]: much every conversation which was happening in the White House and so on, which came out
[Guest]: later on in the Watergate kind of things.
[Guest]: But those tapes are also very revealing, because a lot of the actual discussions were happening
[Guest]: on telephones, you know, between him and Kissinger and so on.
[Guest]: So you can actually go and listen to some of that.
[Guest]: There's a lot of ranting going on as well.
[Guest]: So be prepared for some.
[Amit Varma]: That will also be linked from the episode page.
[Amit Varma]: I think hours of my life will now go down this particular rabbit hole.
[Amit Varma]: And sounds like Nixon would have been a big selfie guy and an Instagram guy if he's like
[Guest]: taping himself back in the day, right?
[Guest]: You know, actually not.
[Guest]: Richard Nixon is, you know, for a person who became the President of the United States
[Guest]: of America and obviously such a successful politician, you know, the highest office in
[Guest]: the land, he was a notoriously sort of reticent and uncomfortable people.
[Guest]: So Richard Nixon was happiest when he could be cocooned inside the White House, when his,
[Guest]: you know, advisors and staff would make sure that nobody disturbed him.
[Guest]: And he would just sit on his yellow legal pad, making notes on various things and sending
[Guest]: things out.
[Guest]: You know, meeting people was something that he loathed.
[Guest]: I mean, he was much happier, and he's one of the most intellectual American presidents.
[Guest]: You know, Alan Greenspan in his memoirs says that, you know, of all the American presidents
[Guest]: that he has seen, Richard Nixon and Bill Clinton are the two most intelligent people.
[Guest]: And I can say from everything that I've seen that Richard Nixon was, at least in terms
[Guest]: of geopolitical thinking and so on, genuinely an original mind.
[Amit Varma]: If any cartoonist is listening to this, I urge you to instantly draw the image that
[Amit Varma]: came to my mind when you were saying this, which is Nixon sitting on his yellow legal
[Amit Varma]: pad while taking notes on it simultaneously.
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: Do the needful.
[Amit Varma]: Moving on now from sort of from the US to the Soviet role in it.
[Amit Varma]: You know, how did Soviet attitude towards South Asia, you know, India, Pakistan evolve
[Amit Varma]: since 1947?
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So, one of the sort of, you know, very strongly held beliefs in India is that the Soviet Union
[Guest]: kind of was stood by India throughout this crisis and, you know, the Indo-Soviet Treaty
[Guest]: of Friendship was signed in August 1971.
[Guest]: All of that is seen as a very important thing, which it undoubtedly was, you know, the Soviet
[Guest]: Union did stand by.
[Guest]: But again, what that standing by meant is something that I think we need to unpack a
[Guest]: little bit.
[Guest]: And again, you know, it's worth going back a little bit in history to understand how
[Guest]: Soviet relationship with India and Pakistan evolves during this period of time, right?
[Guest]: In the early years, neither India nor Pakistan has any particular relationship with the Soviet
[Guest]: Union.
[Guest]: You know, in fact, the first Indian ambassador to the Soviet Union, Mithila Lakshmi Pandit,
[Guest]: who was Arlal Nehru's own sister, couldn't even secure a meeting with Joseph Stalin.
[Guest]: In fact, in the first Indian ambassador to have an audience with Stalin was Sarvapalli
[Guest]: Radhakrishnan, who was our second ambassador.
[Guest]: And it's only after Stalin's death and the advent of Nikita Khrushchev and the change
[Guest]: in policy towards non-socialist third world countries that India-Soviet relations starts
[Guest]: evolving.
[Guest]: This would be around 1953.
[Guest]: 1954-55 is when Khrushchev consolidates at home.
[Guest]: Then he sort of has this policy of, you know, rejigging, moving away from a hard line kind
[Guest]: of saying we'll only support communist countries to look at other non-aligned countries like
[Guest]: India and so on.
[Guest]: So, Pakistan, because of its alliance with the Soviet Union at that point of time is
[Guest]: seen as very much in the US camp.
[Guest]: So, the Pakistanis, interestingly enough, always try to sort of also maintain a link
[Guest]: with the Soviet Union.
[Guest]: In fact, Ayub Khan, you know, in the post sort of 1962 phase, when US-India relations
[Guest]: actually start improving because of the China factor, also makes an attempt to sort of improve
[Guest]: relations with the Soviet Union.
[Guest]: And that actually has some payoffs because in 1965, when India and Pakistan are at war
[Guest]: and the Johnson administration decides that the hell with these guys, you know, we are
[Guest]: not sort of going to get into it.
[Guest]: It is actually the Soviet Union which steps into the position of the mediator between
[Guest]: the two sides.
[Guest]: The post-war conference is held in Tashkent.
[Guest]: It is sort of done and it's a Soviet Union which actually prevails upon Prime Minister
[Guest]: Lal Bahadur Shastri to return those parts of Pakistani territory, which were Azad Kashmir
[Guest]: territory, which were captured by the Indian Army at that point of time, including places
[Guest]: like the Hajibir Pass, about which there is endless sort of, you know, lamenting going
[Guest]: on even nowadays on social media saying, if only we had Hajibir Pass, we could have sort
[Guest]: of given a bloody nose to the terrorists and so on.
[Guest]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, so
[Guest]: Is there some logic to that?
[Guest]: Well, I mean, the Soviet Union basically believed from 1965 onwards that they were now positioned
[Guest]: as the main external player in the subcontinent, that they had supplanted the Americans, they
[Guest]: had taken up the American role, the traditional role, which the United States had as the most
[Guest]: important power.
[Guest]: And in order to play that role, they actually believed and, you know, that they had to maintain
[Guest]: some kind of balance between India and Pakistan, far from sort of, you know, tilting very heavily
[Guest]: towards India.
[Guest]: In the aftermath of Tashkent, the Soviet Union actually starts trying to build a relationship
[Amit Varma]: with Pakistan.
[Guest]: So, like a benevolent and stern big brother.
[Guest]: In 1967, the Soviet Union actually announces arms sales to Pakistan.
[Guest]: And you know, the Indian government, you know, throws a fit.
[Guest]: Domestic opinion in India throws a fit, you know, the questions in Parliament saying Soviet
[Guest]: Union here is this thing and there's a, you know, excellent sort of record of conversation
[Guest]: between Indira Gandhi and Alexei Kasygin, who is the Soviet Premier.
[Guest]: And Mrs. Gandhi tells him in no uncertain terms that, you know, the India-Soviet relationship
[Guest]: has to have an exclusivity to it.
[Guest]: And you know, if the Soviet Union sort of wants to build this kind of relationship with
[Guest]: Pakistan, it's going to be very difficult for her to justify the relationship, friendship
[Guest]: with Soviet Union, right.
[Guest]: So, there is that kind of phase through which the Soviet Union goes.
[Guest]: But come 1969, when the Sino-Soviet relationship gets militarized, the Soviet Union is now
[Guest]: very keen to sort of make sure that India and the Soviet Union come together much more
[Guest]: strongly primarily to send out a signal to the Chinese.
[Guest]: It is in that context that the Soviets first propose a draft of a treaty of friendship,
[Guest]: you know, which is there.
[Guest]: And actually, some negotiations happened in 1969.
[Guest]: But Mrs. Gandhi decides against signing it primarily for domestic political reasons,
[Guest]: because she believes that, you know, signaling a move towards Soviet Union by signing a treaty
[Guest]: like that will not go down well.
[Guest]: And you know, she has elections coming up.
[Guest]: She knows her party's kind of, you know, sort of on the rocks after the 1967 general elections
[Guest]: and so on.
[Guest]: So, that is put off.
[Guest]: And in the summer of 1971, once the Bangladesh crisis really erupts, the Indians bring up
[Guest]: the idea of this treaty once again with the Soviet Union and say that, listen, this is
[Guest]: what you had proposed then.
[Guest]: Why don't we think of concluding something like this?
[Amit Varma]: And in fact, I noticed in your book that it is pushed very hard by D.P.
[Amit Varma]: Dhar.
[Amit Varma]: Ambassador in Soviet Union.
[Amit Varma]: D.P. Dhar, the ambassador there who's almost like a one man force trying to make the treaty
[Guest]: happen not just convincing the Russians, but also convincing Indira Gandhi and the cabinet.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: He was very keen because, partly because he believed that this treaty would align Soviet
[Guest]: position with India very closely in the crisis.
[Guest]: Because again, that is very important to understand, right?
[Guest]: I mean, when Indian sort of foreign minister meets his Soviet counterpart, Swaran Singh
[Guest]: meets his Soviet counterpart, you know, the Soviets say that, listen, we know what you
[Guest]: guys are doing with the army league and so on, right?
[Guest]: I mean, that is fine.
[Guest]: But just make sure that this doesn't really sort of get out of control and so on, because
[Guest]: there's not going to be that much support and stuff like that.
[Guest]: So, the Soviets are kind of reluctant.
[Guest]: And they also have a certain kind of reading of how these various kinds of nationalist
[Guest]: revolutions and all happen.
[Guest]: And they are not particularly convinced that the army league was a particularly, you know,
[Guest]: a revolutionary force in the context.
[Guest]: Bourgeois.
[Unknown]: Yeah.
[Guest]: And then saying, you know, very sort of, you know, compromised mainstream politics.
[Guest]: And then they are also concerned that there are a number of Maoist parties who might just
[Guest]: get the upper hand in an independent Bangladesh, right, which they don't want to because of
[Guest]: their relations with China.
[Guest]: So, the Soviets actually are playing a very interesting and D.P.
[Guest]: Dhar and the Indian government finally use the treaty as a way of trying to align Soviet
[Guest]: position with India.
[Amit Varma]: That is really the background to the way the treaty.
[Amit Varma]: And do the Soviets sort of come closer to agreeing to sign the treaty with India because
[Guest]: relations with China are getting worse?
[Guest]: That's right.
[Guest]: I mean, the Soviets, I mean, they wanted to sign it two years ago, right?
[Guest]: But now the time was coming and they said, fine, we'll sign, we have no problem.
[Guest]: But what is interesting is that, you know, when the Soviet foreign minister Gromyko comes
[Guest]: to India to sort of sign the agreement, after the signing of the agreement, he actually
[Guest]: has a meeting with Indira Gandhi, you know, of which we have a record.
[Guest]: And he tells Mrs. Gandhi in that meeting that, you know, we understand your position, but
[Guest]: we have a saying in a proverb in Russian that, you know, the heart should be warm, but the
[Guest]: head should be cool.
[Guest]: Now, that only means that he is counseling India against any kind of precipitated action,
[Guest]: particularly by way of military action against this thing.
[Guest]: And the Indians exactly get the point.
[Guest]: And they are not very happy.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, that's something that they probably, to an extent, the Indians already agree with
[Amit Varma]: because they've been fairly cool through all of this, right?
[Amit Varma]: They haven't rushed into Pakistan yet.
[Guest]: Yes, they don't want to.
[Guest]: But at the same time, having the Soviet support is very important because that brings the
[Guest]: veto in the Security Council, because they know that the Americans and the Chinese and
[Guest]: every, you know, the Chinese, of course, are not in the Security Council at that point
[Guest]: of time, but the Brits and others are unlikely to sort of really come out in support.
[Guest]: And the Soviet veto is critical.
[Guest]: So you needed the Soviet Union to at least politically support your move.
[Guest]: So you're trying to create, I mean, again, I agree that the Indians had by this time
[Guest]: not made up their mind saying that this is what is going to happen.
[Guest]: But the probability of an armed intervention or some kind of assistance to enable the emergence
[Guest]: of India and Bangladesh is rapidly increasing by the time you're talking to August 1971.
[Amit Varma]: So the treaty is a very big deal.
[Amit Varma]: India can go ahead with confidence now.
[Guest]: Not yet, because though the Soviets have signed the treaty, they have not actually sort of
[Guest]: said that that's going to happen.
[Guest]: And there is an interesting sort of, you know, coda to this because it is actually only in
[Guest]: October 1971, just about two months before the war happens, or not even in actual date
[Guest]: terms, it's only about six weeks, that the Soviet Union finally aligns itself with the
[Guest]: Indian position, because that's when Mrs. Gandhi goes to Moscow for a meeting.
[Guest]: Now, it is very interesting when Indira Gandhi goes to Moscow, you know, the Soviet General
[Guest]: Secretary who's sort of, you know, there's a troika, there is General Secretary Brezhnev,
[Guest]: there is Podgorny, and there is Alexei Kasygin, who's the premier.
[Guest]: So at that point of time, Brezhnev, who's the sort of, by all accounts, the most important
[Guest]: figure of the troika, is actually not in Moscow.
[Guest]: And she is surprised and went to learn that she will not be able to meet Gromyko.
[Guest]: And she takes a decision that she will not leave Moscow without having met Brezhnev.
[Guest]: And so finally, she actually decides to spend that evening hosting a reception by the Indian
[Guest]: sort of embassy in Moscow, meeting friends and so on, and waits for another day, postpones
[Guest]: her trip in order to meet Brezhnev.
[Guest]: And in that meeting with Brezhnev, which goes on for almost five hours, is when, you know,
[Guest]: they lay the full background of the Bangladesh movement, convince the Russians that there
[Guest]: is enough political steam behind this, and that, you know, the emergence of this independent
[Guest]: country is now a foregone conclusion in some ways, and that, you know, the right policy
[Guest]: for India is only to sort of assist its emergence.
[Guest]: And it's at that point of time that the Soviets actually come around to accepting and supporting
[Guest]: India.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, it takes a lot of work to get to that point.
[Amit Varma]: And quite a diplomatic go by her.
[Amit Varma]: And so at this point, what's happening internationally, just kind of, because already there is sort
[Amit Varma]: of outrage in the sense you describe about how Pakistan sent a bunch of journalists as
[Amit Varma]: observers to East Pakistan, as it was then to report on the surroundings there, and one
[Amit Varma]: of those journalists then goes to England, and he decides that he simply has to report
[Amit Varma]: on the horrific atrocities that he's witnessed.
[Amit Varma]: And after getting his family out of Pakistan, he actually publishes the sensational piece
[Amit Varma]: and suddenly the West is aware of what is happening in Pakistan.
[Amit Varma]: And there's a lot of outrage in favor of the East Pakistani rebels.
[Guest]: That's right.
[Guest]: Antony Mascarenas is the sort of Pakistani journalist who breaks the big story and the
[Guest]: Sunday Times in London breaks this story with a headline genocide.
[Guest]: And there is a lot of sort of public reaction to it.
[Guest]: As I said, this is also a period when the notion of human rights and, you know, various
[Guest]: kinds of humanitarian NGOs like the Amnesty and others are sort of getting very active
[Guest]: in international politics.
[Guest]: There are new forms of mobilization around this kind of politics, which we see, you know,
[Guest]: very interestingly coming together, you know, people using advertisements, you know, for
[Guest]: instance, NGOs placing sort of, you know, ads in newspapers saying, here is a petition
[Guest]: to your local MP in the UK, saying that we do not want, you know, whatever, that we want
[Guest]: the government to sort of tell the Pakistanis in no uncertain terms that this is not possible.
[Guest]: And all you need to do is to clip this and post it to your local MP and sign it, right?
[Amit Varma]: And local MPs were inundated with that.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So there are those kinds of new technologies of mobilizing public opinion around these
[Guest]: new ideas, because these are not ideas which have been around forever.
[Guest]: Nobody, you know, really believed that, you know, you know, because the idea of state
[Guest]: sovereignty always was the more established principle in the post war period, you know,
[Guest]: the idea that, you know, human rights or humanitarian sort of, you know, sort of atrocities like
[Guest]: these needed to be actively condemned was a relatively new thing.
[Guest]: There was also a Bengali diaspora from Bangladesh, which was quite strong in Britain, of course,
[Guest]: partly because many of them were from Silet province of East Pakistan.
[Amit Varma]: It's very interesting, you point out most of the Pakistani immigrants in Britain were
[Amit Varma]: actually Bangladeshis from Silet.
[Guest]: So that, you know, they're mobilizing opinions.
[Guest]: Some of them actually sort of predate even the creation of Pakistan, I mean, you know,
[Guest]: the older generations of them were sort of seamen who sort of settled in England and
[Guest]: so on.
[Guest]: So there is that diaspora, there is a similar diaspora of smaller size in the United States.
[Guest]: So all of these people do mobilize.
[Guest]: And then, you know, they do get quite a degree of sort of important public support from various
[Guest]: iconic cultural figures of the time.
[Guest]: You know, people like Joan Baez, you have Ravi Shankar, and, you know,
[Amit Varma]: Who do the concert for Bangladesh.
[Guest]: Right, and then, you know, who's who of the rock music world turn up for that concert.
[Guest]: And again, you know, that ties in with the sort of countercultural moment of the 1968
[Guest]: generation, right, for which a lot of this kind of politics was mediated through music.
[Amit Varma]: And rock music was kind of, you know, was a pretty important.
[Amit Varma]: Is this sort of a cultural aside or was it more central to what actually happened?
[Amit Varma]: Because one would imagine the geopolitical currents really shaped the emergence of Bangladesh's
[Amit Varma]: an independent nation.
[Amit Varma]: Did all of this sort of also matter what was happening in the West?
[Guest]: Well, I mean, it mattered because it was a way of influencing public opinion, which was
[Guest]: quite important, right?
[Guest]: I mean, again, you know, at the end of the day, the states, United States government
[Guest]: and other governments did what they did in pursuit of whatever national interest as they
[Guest]: defined it in various ways.
[Guest]: But in as much as, you know, the war sort of came at a moment when public opinion was
[Guest]: already quite mobilized around issues like Vietnam.
[Guest]: These things were not negligible.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, something like the concert for Bangladesh was kind of, was an important
[Guest]: moment of creating awareness amongst us.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, when you have someone like the great beat poet Allen Ginsberg, writing
[Guest]: a poem about on the road to Jaisalmer in the New York Times, and the poem being produced
[Guest]: in its entirety, it has a certain kind of a cultural impact, which I think is important
[Guest]: for us to recover.
[Guest]: Because at the end of the day, yes, you know, maybe Richard Nixon was not reading Ginsberg
[Guest]: and, you know, getting influenced by anything.
[Guest]: But the reality was that public opinion in the United States was shaped, I mean, you
[Guest]: know, sort of, you know, politicians in the US Senate kind of voted against what the,
[Guest]: you know, sort of supply of weapons to Pakistan was and various kinds of things happened.
[Guest]: So I think it's kind of important to both underline the extent of that and also its
[Guest]: limitations and, you know, so in a sense, Bangladesh becomes a foster child.
[Guest]: But in geopolitical terms, it's still treated as something of pariah, right?
[Guest]: Because you still see it as an internal problem.
[Guest]: You only need to contrast what is happening on the one hand, you have Madison Square Gardens
[Guest]: and the sort of concept of Bangladesh and, you know, a few streets down in the UN sort
[Guest]: of discussions.
[Guest]: You know, Bangladesh is treated as an issue of state sovereignty and saying the only thing
[Guest]: which matters is Pakistan state sovereignty.
[Guest]: If India has a problem, the UN sort of, you know, whatever Commission on Human Rights
[Guest]: or somebody can come in, give assistance for certain kinds of camps, but we really cannot
[Guest]: do much more than that.
[Guest]: And the UN sort of, you know, Secretary General U Thant, who is actually a Burmese at that
[Guest]: point of time, frames this, you know, in pretty conventionally as an issue of the real danger
[Guest]: is a war between India and Pakistan, breakdown of international peace and security.
[Guest]: That is his charter.
[Guest]: His charter is not to sort of ensure human rights, even though the UN Charter also mentions
[Guest]: human rights right up front, right?
[Guest]: So, but the ideational framework within which people were, that's the world in which they
[Amit Varma]: lived.
[Guest]: You have sovereign states dealing with each other.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: And that, you know, these kinds of things are not really issues on which others should get
[Guest]: right.
[Guest]: Well, I mean, it has definitely changed, right?
[Guest]: I mean, you only need to think about the kinds of so-called humanitarian interventions which
[Guest]: happened in the 1990s onwards.
[Guest]: But Bangladesh is at the cusp of the beginning of that politics, of the breaking over from
[Guest]: a world which is seen as where sovereignty rules the roost at all times under all conditions
[Guest]: to one where it then becomes a more qualified objective.
[Guest]: And Bangladesh is an important historical sort of moment, precisely because it shows
[Guest]: how difficult the birth of this kind of politics was.
[Guest]: The fact that 10 million refugees, you know, larger than any other sort of, you know, population
[Guest]: movement in the post Second World War period could not lead to a more significant level
[Guest]: of international involvement should also tell us that international politics has changed.
[Guest]: It has evolved.
[Guest]: Things have moved on, right?
[Amit Varma]: And as I said, as a historian, I'm only interested in understanding that change.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: To go back to that moment, then, you know, as public opinion in the West is changing,
[Amit Varma]: India's diplomatic efforts to convince people of the rightness of the cause is not really
[Amit Varma]: working out because while people are essentially while the US and England and all seem to be
[Amit Varma]: saying that, yeah, we recognize that you have a refugee problem, but we are not going to
[Amit Varma]: tie that with the political solution in Bangladesh and that's Pakistan's internal matter, don't
[Amit Varma]: leave them alone and hey, don't go to war.
[Guest]: That's kind of the message that's coming from there.
[Guest]: That's right.
[Guest]: And I think the Americans were, of course, the most important player, they were the strongest
[Guest]: in taking that line.
[Guest]: The countries of Europe, however, had a slightly different kind of a thing, right?
[Guest]: I mean, Britain at that point of time had a conservative government under Ted Heath
[Guest]: and the conservative government actually sort of ended up supporting India a lot more.
[Guest]: They understood Mrs. Gandhi's meetings with Heath were actually very successful.
[Guest]: They understood the point of view that this situation now kind of completely spiraled
[Guest]: out of hand and so on.
[Guest]: The West Germany at that point of time under Willy Brandt again took quite a sort of line
[Guest]: which was sympathetic to India's predicament and of course to the issue at hand, which
[Guest]: was the sort of plight of the people.
[Guest]: So I think, you know, they were, but at the end of the day, the United States still had
[Guest]: the dominant hand in terms of how these issues played out.
[Guest]: So to that extent, you know, Mrs. Gandhi's last sort of stop was to go to the United
[Guest]: States and her meetings with Nixon in November 1971 really go nowhere.
[Guest]: They only sort of show up the gulf between the two sides.
[Guest]: Is there a tape of that?
[Guest]: Well, I don't think there's a tape of that, but you can listen to a lot of things that
[Guest]: Nixon had to say, not just about Mrs. Gandhi, but about the Indians subsequently.
[Guest]: His motivation at that point of time is to tell India and Mrs. Gandhi in no uncertain
[Guest]: terms that an attack on Pakistan would be the worst thing that they could do.
[Guest]: And once of course India sort of decides to pull the trigger, then Nixon is mad and he
[Guest]: then goes on to sort of terminate economic aid to India, which is India was the largest
[Guest]: recipient of economic aid until that point of time, pulls off military assistance to
[Guest]: India of various kinds and, you know, then begins, you know, all the other things which
[Guest]: happened thereafter.
[Amit Varma]: So take me to the pulling of the trigger, you know, we've reached a September, October
[Amit Varma]: of the crisis and we are reaching a point where India simply cannot take any more refugees.
[Amit Varma]: What is the point at which they decide that we must do something and what is it that they
[Guest]: then end up doing?
[Guest]: So the Indians are training the sort of the Bengalis in the Mukti Bahini and others in
[Guest]: a series of training camps.
[Guest]: By October 1971, the Indians decide that, you know, it is important now to sort of take
[Guest]: this crisis to its culmination.
[Guest]: Because the longer this goes on, the more difficult it is going to be for India to hold
[Guest]: together this kind of somewhat disparate coalition of people who have come together under this
[Amit Varma]: Mukti Bahini.
[Amit Varma]: And they're already fighting with each other.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Guest]: They had internal tensions.
[Guest]: The Indians also were supporting, you know, the R&DW had raised another militia called
[Guest]: the Mujib Bahini, which was some of, you know, Mujibur Rahman's nephews and some of the radical
[Guest]: students and then their followers and so on.
[Guest]: So there were all these kinds of games going on and the Indians just believed that it was
[Guest]: important to now take the crisis to its logical conclusion.
[Guest]: So their entire approach was to sort of keep assisting the Mukti Bahini militarily to sort
[Guest]: of make deeper forays into Pakistan, East Pakistan.
[Guest]: And by 1971, the Indians were operating, the Indian army used to give artillery support
[Guest]: and other kinds of things.
[Guest]: And, you know, Indian soldiers along with this thing, you know, used to go in, they
[Guest]: were, you know, attacking Pakistani positions, capturing territory, fighting deep inside
[Guest]: Pakistan.
[Guest]: And the Pakistanis, of course, know all of this stuff, you know, and they are getting
[Guest]: quite sort of unnerved by this kind of escalation in the East.
[Guest]: And the Indian position is that, you know, we will just continue to do this till the
[Guest]: Pakistanis themselves pull the trigger.
[Guest]: And you know, which in effect is what happens, you know, P. N. Dhar, who was Mrs. Gandhi's
[Guest]: secretary at that point of time, has this important quote, right?
[Guest]: He tells Yadav Dhar, D. P. Dhar, that, you know, he quotes Napoleon's maxim that you
[Guest]: never interrupt an enemy when he's making a mistake.
[Guest]: And he says that, you know, Yaya Khan is sort of going to make this mistake.
[Guest]: So let's just wait and do this.
[Amit Varma]: And that's exactly what happens.
[Amit Varma]: Which is kind of brilliant and which is the kind of thing you read in storybooks because
[Amit Varma]: in real life, it's so messy, it doesn't always work out like that.
[Amit Varma]: The enemy doesn't always do what you want him to.
[Amit Varma]: But in this case, the enemy did exactly what you wanted him to.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: In fact, you know, when the Pakistanis sort of bomb or attempt to bomb the Indian airfields
[Guest]: on 3rd of December, Mrs. Gandhi is on a plane back from Calcutta to Delhi.
[Guest]: And when they get the message saying that, you know, the Pakistanis have attacked, you
[Guest]: know, D. P. Dhar is on the flight with her and he comes back and tells a very young diplomat
[Guest]: who later became very prominent called J. N. Dixit, he says, this fool has done exactly
[Guest]: what we wanted him to do.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: I mean, so this was something they were expecting.
[Guest]: And they were hoping that the Pakistanis would actually begin this war.
[Guest]: And till date, you know, the Indian position is that the war was begun by the Pakistanis
[Guest]: on 3rd of December 1971, which is true in a sense that the formal declaration of war
[Guest]: actually happened on that day.
[Guest]: But the reality was that the Indians were already escalating and putting the squeeze
[Guest]: on the Pakistanis throughout November.
[Amit Varma]: This is brilliant maneuvering.
[Amit Varma]: If someone from Bollywood is listening to this episode of the scene in the unseen, and
[Amit Varma]: they must be because everybody listens to the scene in the unseen, kindly make a film
[Amit Varma]: on this brilliant book.
[Amit Varma]: So moving on from there, at the time, then 3rd December, Pakistan is attacked and India
[Amit Varma]: is like, yeah, we are going in now, they've started the war, we can do what we want.
[Guest]: What is the Indian plan?
[Guest]: Well, the Indian military planning has been sort of evolving, you know, as these plans
[Guest]: tend to evolve in various iterations.
[Guest]: And the broad plan, even by the time the war begins, is that the Indian army should sort
[Guest]: of enter East Pakistan from 3 different directions, because we have landlocked in that way.
[Guest]: And you would capture enough territory in which to sort of put the provisional government
[Guest]: of Bangladesh and then declare war, just to sort of go back a little bit, you know.
[Guest]: So in April 1971, when the Awami League politicians come to India and a significant number of
[Guest]: them are there, they come up with this idea of establishing a provisional independent
[Guest]: government of Bangladesh and seek India's recognition of it.
[Guest]: And the Indian government actually sort of is reluctant to give that recognition, because
[Guest]: under international law, a government can be recognized as sovereign only if it controls
[Guest]: significant amounts of territory.
[Guest]: And at that point of time, they don't have any territory.
[Guest]: They are effectively operating out of the R&DW's office in Calcutta, though the headquarters
[Guest]: is supposed to be in this place called Mujib Nagar inside East Pakistan.
[Guest]: And in fact, those of your listeners who are sort of interested can go on YouTube and check
[Guest]: out this very nice video of the formation of the provisional government of Bangladesh.
[Guest]: You know, there's a ceremony which happens actually inside East Pakistan.
[Guest]: But you know, that ceremony is entirely facilitated by the Indians.
[Guest]: It's the BSF which clears the road to allow everyone to have.
[Guest]: Send me the link.
[Guest]: I'll put it in the episode page.
[Guest]: Yeah, it's a very interesting sort of episode.
[Guest]: And so the provisional government therefore exists, but Indians have not formally recognized
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: So the plan is that you sort of capture enough territory so that you can recognize the provisional
[Guest]: government and then sort of create conditions where the people can eventually go back and
[Guest]: so on.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: And that's really the hope.
[Guest]: The provisional government is recognized on the 6th of December 1971 once the war gets
[Guest]: underway.
[Guest]: Because they've taken some territory.
[Guest]: They've captured territory and they're sort of moving with the Indian troops and so on.
[Guest]: So all of that has happened.
[Guest]: But nowhere does the Indian sort of military plan mention the capture of Dhaka as a particular
[Guest]: objective of the plans.
[Guest]: The plans are still about saying that you want to do it.
[Guest]: And this is partly because of the experience of the 1965 war and other things.
[Guest]: Indians know that the international community will intervene.
[Guest]: There is likely to be some kind of a UN Security Council push to sort of calling for a ceasefire.
[Guest]: So the important thing is to have enough territory quickly to sort of recognize this.
[Guest]: Once that is done, that's a fait accompli.
[Guest]: Then you know, other things will fall into place and so on.
[Guest]: So there is no really no plan to capture Dhaka per se.
[Guest]: And that was something of a fortuitous occurrence during the war itself.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: And internationally, what's happening?
[Amit Varma]: War has broken out in India, Pakistan, what everybody feared has happened because none
[Amit Varma]: of the other players really want this to happen.
[Guest]: What are the maneuverings in the UN and behind the scenes?
[Guest]: So again, I mean, you know, there are a couple of sort of resolutions which are tabled.
[Guest]: The Soviet Union sort of vetoes them and so on.
[Guest]: And that's what is happening in the UN stage.
[Guest]: It's sort of a predictable kind of a game, at least till the very end, which is kind
[Guest]: of being played out.
[Guest]: What is more important is the moves which are made by the Nixon administration at that
[Guest]: point of time.
[Guest]: So the Nixon administration starts putting a lot of pressure on the Soviet Union, saying
[Guest]: that India is effectively your client state and you guys have egged on the Indians.
[Guest]: And if this crisis becomes more important, we have an alliance with Pakistan, so we are
[Guest]: going to get involved.
[Guest]: And we then you just don't know what's going to happen between you and us.
[Guest]: You have this treaty with them.
[Guest]: We have this treaty with Pakistan.
[Guest]: So you know, this is going to be a major bust up and you know, we are supposed to be having
[Guest]: better relations as part of detente and other kinds of things.
[Guest]: Now, is this what the Soviet Union wants?
[Guest]: And the Soviet Union is actually under a bit of pressure, you know, not to say that they
[Guest]: cave in before the Americans, but they also then start telling the Indians that listen,
[Guest]: this has to sort of kind of be finished, you know, finish it fast and move quickly and
[Guest]: do what you can kind of story.
[Guest]: So there is that dynamic to it which is playing.
[Guest]: The second thing the Americans do is that they reach out to the Chinese and tell them
[Guest]: saying, you know, if China diverts a few divisions of its troops to the border, then the Indians
[Guest]: are going to get scared.
[Guest]: They will then be forced to divert their attention from the operations in East Pakistan.
[Guest]: And that will then enable the Pakistanis to sort of hold their own.
[Guest]: And the Chinese hear out this proposal, which is related to by Kissinger to their representative
[Guest]: in the UN.
[Guest]: And about two days later, around 10th of December, they come back and say, yes, thank you, but
[Guest]: no thanks.
[Guest]: So we do not think that is what we are interested in, partly because the Chinese have, you know,
[Guest]: they are realist, whatever else, you know, their ideal.
[Amit Varma]: But it is very interesting that they are not asking China to intervene.
[Amit Varma]: They are just saying take some troops to the border and distract.
[Amit Varma]: You know, this reminds me of an old chess anecdote.
[Amit Varma]: I forget.
[Amit Varma]: I think it involves Botvinnik, I am not very sure.
[Amit Varma]: So there is a world championship match where someone is supposed to be playing Botvinnik
[Amit Varma]: or there is a match of some sort.
[Amit Varma]: I hope it is Botvinnik and I am not messing it up.
[Amit Varma]: Well, let us just say the Soviet grandmaster who smokes a lot and the rules are that he
[Amit Varma]: cannot smoke.
[Amit Varma]: But this gentleman just sits with a cigarette in his mouth and he does not light it.
[Amit Varma]: And the other guy is completely perturbed and eventually loses the game.
[Amit Varma]: And finally, he says, why did you sit like that?
[Amit Varma]: You were not going to light the cigarette.
[Amit Varma]: And he said, the threat is greater than the execution.
[Guest]: It seems to me quite what, sorry for the digression.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: No, I think that that is kind of what the Americans had in mind.
[Guest]: But it is interesting.
[Guest]: The Americans actually thought the Chinese would go forward.
[Amit Varma]: Why did the Chinese go forward?
[Guest]: So Nixon and Kissinger's expectation very much was that the Chinese will intervene in
[Guest]: some fashion.
[Guest]: In fact, there is this fantastic sort of, you know, it is generally like fantastic in
[Guest]: a sense of a fantasy, right, of a conversation between Nixon and Kissinger, where they sort
[Guest]: of are, you know, literally carrying on in this sort of, you know, almost sort of delusionary
[Guest]: way of saying, oh, so the Chinese come in and if the Chinese come in, then the Soviets
[Guest]: are going to get into it.
[Guest]: And if the Soviets are going to get into it, then what is going to happen?
[Guest]: And you know, then are we going to get into it?
[Guest]: Is there going to be a nuclear war?
[Guest]: I mean, it is just a, you know, a sequence of sort of imaginations and all of that is
[Guest]: deflated.
[Guest]: When the Chinese come and say that, listen, we are not going to.
[Guest]: And the Chinese do not want to do it because the Chinese have been telling Yaya Khan from
[Guest]: the time the crisis broke out that you have to have some kind of a political solution.
[Guest]: The Chinese also have some of their Maoist allies in the East Pakistani parties, the
[Guest]: Bengali parties.
[Guest]: And they say that, listen, this kind of a military solution is not going to work.
[Guest]: So by the time the war breaks out, the Chinese are quite clear that, you know, the situation
[Guest]: on the ground is such that the Pakistanis cannot hold their own, you know.
[Guest]: So they say that, you know, better to sort of take a realistic view.
[Amit Varma]: It's a losing cause.
[Guest]: Just stay away.
[Guest]: You know, and ultimately you can have better influence with the independent state of Bangladesh
[Guest]: whenever it comes up, right, rather than trying to sort of, you know, put all the chips into
[Amit Varma]: the Pakistan.
[Guest]: But they don't actually want Bangladesh.
[Guest]: Well, I mean, again, you know, I don't think they sort of wanted the breakup of Pakistan.
[Guest]: Pakistan was a very important sort of state and a friend of theirs.
[Guest]: But when things kind of reached the point where the war began, I think they sort of
[Guest]: reconciled themselves to what would be the inevitable realities.
[Guest]: Of course, they were unhappy with the fact that India would sort of emerge in such a
[Guest]: strong position and so on.
[Guest]: But they managed to sort of, you know, keep their own.
[Guest]: So this is the sort of broader geopolitics and the American maneuvering.
[Guest]: And then, of course, the United States decides as a last measure to send the sort of, you
[Guest]: know, the Seventh Fleet into the Bay of Bengal, which, you know, is a sort of a straightforward
[Guest]: threat at Indian sort of forces.
[Guest]: And the Indians also kind of panic and, you know, their assessments suggest that the Americans
[Guest]: might actually be landing of Adalino Marines somewhere in East Pakistan to evacuate, you
[Guest]: know, senior Pakistani officials or American citizens and so on.
[Guest]: So there is a concern that the American intervention is going to be much more direct.
[Guest]: The Soviets send a submarine to tail the Americans of the Seventh Fleet.
[Guest]: So you know, there is this entire story going on.
[Guest]: But the paradoxical outcome of all of this is that India, which until that point of time
[Guest]: is kind of broadly still thinking in terms of, you know, maximum capture of territory,
[Guest]: consolidating position and so on, then feels that now there is a need to really sort of
[Guest]: reach this to a sort of a finality, which they had not envisioned before.
[Guest]: And the Pakistan and because the Indian forces had sort of made significant gains by bypassing
[Guest]: Pakistani positions and sort of converging in the interior of the country, they now decide
[Guest]: to make a quick dash for Dhaka and to force the surrender of Dhaka.
[Guest]: And that then, you know, was an outcome which was not foreseen at that point of time.
[Guest]: And as you mentioned up front, you know, as late as 12th of December, General Maneksha
[Guest]: actually was giving orders that, listen, maybe we should go back to some of the towns we
[Guest]: bypassed and hold them because there's going to be a UN Security Council resolution calling
[Guest]: for an immediate ceasefire at some point.
[Guest]: So we need to sort of have the territory.
[Guest]: But you know, there are others in the army headquarters and people like General Jacob,
[Guest]: who was the chief of staff of the Eastern Command, which was the operational command
[Guest]: dealing with this, who believed that actually, no, this was a moment when they could actually
[Guest]: force not just a quick move into Dhaka, but also a surrender by the Pakistanis at Dhaka.
[Amit Varma]: So what's the significance of taking over Dhaka in particular?
[Amit Varma]: Is it that basically you've conquered East Pakistan?
[Amit Varma]: You know, Pakistan has to surrender and Bangladesh is de facto independent.
[Guest]: So not only was it about sort of capturing Dhaka as a city, which was a capital city
[Guest]: and the symbolic meaning of it, but the fact that the Pakistanis gave an unconditional
[Guest]: surrender with 93,000 troops being there.
[Guest]: That was an extraordinary sort of an outcome, which I don't think was what was envisioned
[Guest]: at the beginning of the war at all.
[Guest]: It's beyond even Indira Gandhi's wildest dreams, I guess.
[Guest]: Well, I mean, in a sense, once it came to it, I think, you know, obviously the scale
[Guest]: of the victory then is changed, right?
[Guest]: I mean, that's when, you know, outcomes also then, you know, seem inevitable.
[Guest]: Yeah, then you see that, listen, I mean, this is just the most extraordinary thing which
[Guest]: happened.
[Guest]: And in fact, even there, there was one last sort of, you know, slip between the cup and
[Guest]: the lip, so to speak, you know, probably, which was that as the Indians were making
[Guest]: this drive towards Dhaka in the last 48 hours of the war, there is a resolution introduced
[Guest]: in the UN Security Council calling for an immediate halt to hostilities and a withdrawal
[Guest]: of all armed forces from Bangladesh.
[Guest]: Now, that would have effectively meant, if that resolution had passed, that the fighting
[Guest]: forces would have had to stop wherever they were.
[Guest]: Some kind of a ceasefire, you know, would have been imposed between the two sides, policed
[Guest]: by some UN personnel.
[Guest]: And both Indian and Pakistani troops would have had to withdraw, right?
[Guest]: And this was still a possibility at this moment.
[Guest]: And why was it a possibility?
[Guest]: It was because this resolution was actually introduced by Poland.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: Now, you know, nobody in their right mind, particularly Indian diplomats, believed that
[Guest]: it was a resolution which was introduced by Poland.
[Guest]: It was actually a resolution supported by the Soviet Union, right?
[Guest]: Which again tells you that, you know, at this point of time, the Soviets had, were in no
[Guest]: mood to veto a third resolution.
[Guest]: They actually felt that, listen, if India cannot finish the job, you know, we've got
[Guest]: to table some kind of a resolution.
[Amit Varma]: What if the resolution actually happened and India just went ahead anyway?
[Guest]: Well, yeah, you could have sort of done that kind of a fait accompli.
[Guest]: But if that resolution actually passed, then you might have been in a diplomatic pickle
[Guest]: of some kind, because then you would have had to antagonize the Soviets in order to
[Guest]: sort of get to that particular outcome.
[Amit Varma]: Now, it's very interesting that one of the people who didn't want that resolution to
[Amit Varma]: pass and in fact stood in its way is Bhutto.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So Bhutto had just come to Pakistan to join the delegation at the UN.
[Guest]: And Bhutto, when he sort of, you know, sees the text of this resolution, he makes a very
[Guest]: impassioned speech, once again, which you can listen to it on YouTube, you know, basically
[Guest]: saying that, you know, Poland is a country which has been partitioned so many times in
[Guest]: its history.
[Guest]: And of all countries, I'm most disappointed that Poland, you know, and there are very
[Guest]: few South Asian historians of his generation, politicians who would have known about the
[Guest]: partition of Poland in the 18th century and so on, tells you something about Bhutto, makes
[Guest]: this fantastic speech and theatrically sort of tears up that resolution.
[Guest]: This will also be linked, by the way, walks away, right.
[Guest]: And the, it is interesting to speculate because there's no other way of sort of dealing with
[Guest]: this.
[Guest]: There's no evidence.
[Guest]: Why Bhutto sort of decided to sort of, you know, more or less walk away from the UN and
[Guest]: not allow the resolution to sort of be passed or even be debated in a serious way.
[Guest]: And the best answer it seems to me is that Bhutto knew that the Pakistan army was at
[Guest]: the brink of an extraordinary defeat.
[Guest]: And he knew that power would then pass to him in West Pakistan and it would pass to
[Guest]: him under conditions of when the army was totally humiliated, which was in some ways
[Guest]: the best political outcome for him on which to begin constructing a new.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: So he actually, in a sense, supported the partition of Pakistan to advance his personal
[Amit Varma]: career.
[Amit Varma]: And I can see where the incentives make sense for him because in a democratic, united Pakistan,
[Amit Varma]: in any case, the majority of the people are in Bangladesh, you're always going to have
[Amit Varma]: a Mujib like figure who will get more votes than you and, you know, you will never get
[Amit Varma]: that kind of political power.
[Amit Varma]: And here you have East Pakistan cut off.
[Amit Varma]: You are the dominant political figure in West Pakistan.
[Amit Varma]: And the army is suddenly much weaker.
[Amit Varma]: And in fact, that's exactly what happened.
[Amit Varma]: Yahya had to quit at the end of the war.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Guest]: And so, in a sense, I mean, yeah, I mean, whether it was his personal agenda or whether
[Guest]: you say that success in politics is about riding the waves of history.
[Guest]: You just had a hilarious phone call here, kindly, kindly tell us about it.
[Guest]: Well, I mean, basically, Yahya Khan is trying to sort of tell Bhutto that, listen, this
[Guest]: resolution works in our interest in some way.
[Guest]: Overtrunk call.
[Guest]: And Bhutto pretends as if the line is bad and says, sorry, I can't hear you and just
[Guest]: hangs up.
[Guest]: And the operator says, no, I can hear him pretty clearly.
[Guest]: What the hell with you, right?
[Guest]: Because he's quite determined not to sort of go down this route.
[Guest]: Of course, you know, you can interpret it in other ways of saying that Bhutto did not
[Guest]: want to sort of be seen as presiding over the humiliation of the, you know, various
[Guest]: kinds of things.
[Guest]: But the reality was that he understood that this outcome now was going to happen in this
[Guest]: particular way.
[Guest]: And that if it happened, you know, here was an opportunity to sort of, you know, come
[Guest]: back to power in Pakistan and do something different, which is exactly what he managed
[Guest]: to do subsequently.
[Amit Varma]: So at this crucial moment, in a manner of speaking, Bhutto was India's friend.
[Amit Varma]: So what happens when the dust settles?
[Amit Varma]: Like, this is all very fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: And it's kind of clear from reading your account of everything that the whole thing is so multifactorial
[Amit Varma]: and so contingent upon events just happening to work out the way they did and, you know,
[Amit Varma]: but after all the dust has settled, what happens?
[Amit Varma]: How are India-Bangladesh relations?
[Amit Varma]: How do those kind of go over the years?
[Amit Varma]: And you know, how does the rest of the Cold War play out for the time that the Cold War
[Amit Varma]: is still running?
[Amit Varma]: Where do the Soviets go?
[Amit Varma]: Where does the US go?
[Guest]: What happens?
[Guest]: So yeah, so in terms of India-Bangladesh relations, what happens is that basically Mudibur Rahman
[Guest]: comes back in January 1972 to independent Bangladesh, you know, becomes the leader.
[Guest]: There's a new constitution of Bangladesh, which is written in the year 1972, drafted
[Guest]: by a group of young lawyers, including a man called Kamal Hussain, who has been news lately
[Guest]: in Bangladesh for having been the figurehead of the opposition against Sheikh Hasina in
[Guest]: the last elections which happened.
[Guest]: So Kamal Hussain was a, I think, a 35-year-old lawyer at that point of time and wrote this,
[Guest]: what was for its time a pretty extraordinarily progressive constitution.
[Guest]: You know, it is actually even the Indian constitution did not have the word secular in its preamble
[Guest]: at that point of time.
[Guest]: The Bangladeshi constitution had it and they were determined to create a progressive state,
[Guest]: you know, within the parameters of that time.
[Guest]: So it was a constitution of some vision and some ambition for a new state.
[Guest]: But of course the reality was that, you know, Bangladesh had a series of problems.
[Guest]: First of all, it was not getting international recognition till 1974.
[Guest]: Basically the Pakistanis got the Chinese to veto Bangladesh's entry twice into the UN.
[Guest]: Without having that kind of recognition, Bangladesh could not access international aid in any
[Guest]: significant way.
[Guest]: The only countries which were giving aid to it were India and the Soviet Union.
[Guest]: And then eventually that led the Bangladeshis to sort of given, you know, Mujibur Rahman
[Guest]: gave an olive branch to Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto, attended a meeting of the OIC, the Organization
[Guest]: of Islamic Countries in Pakistan in 1974.
[Guest]: That was seen as a moment of post-war rapprochement between the two of them.
[Guest]: And you know, then of course the following year Mujibur himself was overthrown in a military
[Guest]: coup and assassinated in Bangladesh.
[Guest]: And then of course, you know, that history of that country takes a very different turn
[Guest]: from that point onwards.
[Guest]: So, in a sense, all the sort of pro-India forces are kind of marginalized for a long
[Guest]: period of time and that has its own dynamic within Bangladesh.
[Guest]: The India-Pakistan relationship, of course, is kind of interesting because that's when
[Guest]: you have the post-war conference, which results in something called the Simla Agreement, which
[Guest]: is again in popular Indian consciousness and other, you know, area of almost incessant
[Guest]: heartburn about why we did not impose a solution on Kashmir at the time when we had the upper
[Guest]: hand and so on.
[Guest]: And I think the answer to that is what the record suggests is actually quite straightforward.
[Guest]: The assumption is that we had these 93,000 prisoners of war and that we could have used
[Guest]: that to get the Pakistanis to sign on to whatever it is that we wanted them to sign on to.
[Guest]: But the reality was that Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto was very clear that even if India took all
[Guest]: of those 93,000 prisoners of war and kept them in India forever, he would not sort of
[Guest]: survive the signing of an agreement on Kashmir in that sense.
[Guest]: Politically.
[Guest]: And I think the Indians understood that dynamic and they felt that, you know, it was better
[Guest]: to invest in a politician like Bhutto and not to impose a solution.
[Guest]: You know, P.N.
[Guest]: Haqsir used to say that, he used to constantly say, and even in his written notes, talk about
[Guest]: the treaty of Assay.
[Guest]: He used to say that we can impose a punitive treaty on Pakistan today, but a democratic
[Guest]: politician will not survive it, and whenever you have another group of revanchists coming
[Guest]: into power, this treaty will be overthrown by the force of events.
[Guest]: Much like Germany between World War I and II.
[Guest]: So his whole entire framework was to say that this is not going to be a workable solution,
[Guest]: which I think was the right judgment at that point.
[Amit Varma]: And very enlightened, though, obviously, eventually Zia-ul-Haq comes to power.
[Guest]: Yeah, everyone.
[Guest]: And, you know, in retrospect, in India, we can keep sort of, you know, beating our breasts
[Guest]: about why this happened or not happened.
[Guest]: The second dynamic of it, which I think in India, we still do not understand, is the
[Guest]: role played by Soviet Union in the post-war position.
[Guest]: The first country that Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto visits in January 1972 is the Soviet Union,
[Guest]: because he knows that that's a country which holds the key to the peace solution.
[Guest]: And it's the Soviets who tell the Indians that India has to give up territory, which
[Guest]: is sort of done that, and will have to sort of repatriate prisoners of war.
[Guest]: Let's also remember, under international law, holding on to prisoners of war after this
[Guest]: thing is illegal.
[Guest]: In a sense, it was an embarrassment for us to be holding on to them.
[Guest]: The only reason we held on to them, actually speaking, was because we were technically
[Guest]: not the people who are holding the prisoners of war, even though they were physically in
[Guest]: our custody.
[Guest]: We were holding them on behalf of the government of Bangladesh.
[Guest]: And Mujibur Rahman was very keen that India should not repatriate these prisoners.
[Guest]: Till such time, the Pakistanis agreed to try about 180 Pakistani officers whom they had
[Guest]: identified as war criminals.
[Guest]: So he wanted to have a war crimes trial.
[Guest]: There was a legislation which was passed in Bangladesh at that point of time to do that.
[Guest]: But ultimately, in order to strike this deal with Pakistan and get international recognition,
[Guest]: UN admission, etc., Mujib reluctantly allowed to let go of that war crimes trial.
[Guest]: And subsequently, that paved the way for repatriation of prisoners of war.
[Guest]: So it was a complex situation.
[Guest]: I think the scale of India's victory once again blinds us to what the political realities
[Guest]: of the time, which was that, you know, the Indians strongly felt and quite rightly that
[Guest]: Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto would not survive a day in office if he managed to sort of, you know,
[Guest]: sign some agreement which legitimized either the status quo in Kashmir or something else.
[Guest]: Or that the Soviet Union, which was your only key partner at that point of time, would acquiesce
[Guest]: in some such arrangement.
[Guest]: Nobody was willing to do it.
[Guest]: So in that sense, I think the similar agreement basically worked on the premise that you would,
[Guest]: you know, have the border between India and Pakistan will become the line of control,
[Guest]: the ceasefire line.
[Guest]: And that over a period of time, the ceasefire line would come to acquire the characteristics
[Guest]: of an international border.
[Guest]: In a sense, it would kind of become a de facto border, which in effect is what is the situation
[Guest]: even today.
[Amit Varma]: So you described the 1971 war, quote, as the most significant geopolitical event in the
[Amit Varma]: subcontinent since partition in 1947.
[Amit Varma]: Few contemporary conflicts have been so brief and localized, but had such protracted and
[Amit Varma]: global ramifications, stop quote.
[Guest]: Elaborate on that a bit.
[Guest]: Well, I think, you know, the ramifications of the war, as I said, were quite extraordinary.
[Guest]: You had a country like Bangladesh, which is a very large populous country coming into
[Guest]: independence on its own steam.
[Guest]: As I said, I think, you know, it changed, the Bangladesh war changes the sort of geopolitics
[Guest]: of the subcontinent in significant ways.
[Guest]: I mean, just to give you one example, it's in the period after the 1971 war that Pakistan,
[Guest]: first under Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto, subsequent to Zia ul Haq, actually starts identifying
[Guest]: itself a lot more with the sort of, you know, the, the, you know, Islamic autocracies of
[Guest]: the Middle East.
[Guest]: In fact, Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto says very clearly that, you know, we do not want to be seen
[Guest]: as a South Asian country anymore.
[Guest]: Our natural inclination is towards our friends in West Asia.
[Guest]: That's when the relationship between Saudi and Pakistan and, you know, we've had Mohammed
[Guest]: bin Salman coming recently and saying all those things.
[Guest]: The starting point for that, in many ways, was the post-1971 war.
[Amit Varma]: Stressing the Islam argument rather than the geographical argument.
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: But doesn't it kind of go further back because since the 19th century, there's sort of been
[Amit Varma]: this tension within the Indian subcontinent of Muslims feeling, you know, dual loyalties,
[Amit Varma]: one to Qom, which is a larger Muslim global nation, so to say, and another to whatever
[Amit Varma]: the local loyalties might have been to the nation of India itself.
[Amit Varma]: Not that the two are necessarily incompatible, I'm not saying that, but these stresses of
[Guest]: identity have
[Guest]: Yeah, but I mean, see, the identification with the wider Islamic Ummah is one part of
[Guest]: the identity of many Indians as, you know, people have these kinds of identities.
[Guest]: But here you are talking about a relationship between Pakistan as a sovereign state and
[Guest]: a set of countries in the Middle East, which becomes very strong, you know, or at least
[Guest]: that's a building of that.
[Guest]: The second, I think, important and in some ways very long lasting consequence of the
[Guest]: sort of 1971 war is a nuclearization of the Indian subcontinent, right?
[Guest]: I mean, the Indian decision to sort of ultimately, you know, proceed its nuclear program to the
[Guest]: point where it can start being tested happens in the aftermath of 1971 against the backdrop
[Guest]: of the Americans having sent a nuclear armed aircraft carrier into the Bay of Bengal.
[Guest]: So Indians want to be sure that we cannot be sort of, you know, put into that position
[Guest]: of blackmail ever again.
[Guest]: And even before the Indians do it, and already in early 1972, Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto gets together
[Guest]: with the few nuclear scientists that Pakistan has and says that, come what may, Pakistan
[Guest]: has to build nuclear weapons.
[Guest]: You know, it's in that context that, you know, he says the famous thing about eating grass
[Guest]: and all that stuff.
[Guest]: So there is that dimension, which is again a reality of the subcontinent as we live with.
[Guest]: And the third thing, I think, you know, in a way that is kind of, you know, significant
[Guest]: and, you know, really sort of, you know, has had a long lasting impact on the subcontinent
[Guest]: is Pakistan's desire to get even with India for 1971, you know, which is still given a
[Guest]: sort of as an ideological justification for its support of terrorism in the subcontinent,
[Guest]: you know, every sort of loss of innocent life is justified as a sort of some kind of a payback
[Guest]: for 1971.
[Guest]: But the reality is that for a lot of people, you know, that was a formative moment, you
[Guest]: know, particularly for officers in the Pakistan army, you know, I remember, you know, I think
[Guest]: it's in Parvez Musharraf's autobiography, he says that he was a young officer when he
[Guest]: heard of the Pakistan army surrender.
[Guest]: And he said, I just burst into tears, you know, because it's such a humiliating moment
[Guest]: for us to be defeated by our, you know, single largest adversary in this way.
[Amit Varma]: And quite honestly, any Indian officer would react in the same way if India had to surrender.
[Guest]: I'd imagine.
[Guest]: And just like the 1962 war has left scars in our collective sort of consciousness.
[Guest]: But I think the scale of what happened in Bangladesh was remarkably different, right?
[Guest]: I mean, the country was broken up into two.
[Guest]: One of the two wings of the bodiless bird.
[Guest]: Exactly right.
[Guest]: And then you had to sort of begin rebuilding in totally different ways.
[Guest]: So I think, you know, it's in that context that I believe that, you know, many of the
[Guest]: sort of current challenges that we face in the subcontinent in terms of India-Pakistan
[Guest]: relations, the way the subcontinent relates to the wider world, all of which were decisively
[Guest]: shaped by this crisis of 1971.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, this episode has already taken more than two hours, you know, the Bangladesh
[Amit Varma]: war could have been over in this time.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll ask for your last comments as, you know, people often say history doesn't exactly
[Amit Varma]: repeat itself, but it rhymes.
[Amit Varma]: So looking back on all the flow of events that led to the Bangladesh war and everything
[Amit Varma]: that happened, are there any lessons of history that you can extrapolate to the current day
[Amit Varma]: that you wish that politicians in South Asia were more aware of?
[Guest]: Well, you know, in a sense, history doesn't offer any lessons, right?
[Amit Varma]: Historians only do.
[Amit Varma]: Well, you're a historian.
[Guest]: So yeah, and I'm one of those historians who actually has a bit of a suspicion of any straightforward
[Guest]: lessons to be learned from history, so to speak.
[Guest]: But I think what the Bangladesh crisis does tell us, and it's kind of worth remembering,
[Guest]: you know, even as we are sort of talking about this episode, India and Pakistan are in the
[Guest]: middle of another kind of a crisis and so on, is that no subcontinental crisis is ever
[Guest]: a subcontinental affair.
[Guest]: There will invariably be wider geopolitical forces, which will impinge upon the way that
[Guest]: we act, right?
[Guest]: And much as we would like to believe that, you know, we are a strong power, we are capable
[Guest]: of sort of acting on our own and so on.
[Guest]: These wider geopolitical factors and the way that they shape outcomes and events in subcontinent
[Guest]: are always worth bearing in mind.
[Guest]: And what is also more important than it was even in the context of 1971 is that the subcontinent,
[Guest]: particularly India today is sort of, you know, connected to the rest of the world in a much
[Guest]: more deeper way, right?
[Guest]: And those kinds of issues will also bring their own sort of considerations and pressures
[Guest]: to bear on anything.
[Guest]: So the only thing I will say is that, you know, perhaps the most important thing is
[Guest]: to understand that, you know, the subcontinent is not some kind of island unto itself, right?
[Guest]: I mean, you know, what happens here, the politics, the dynamics of India, Pakistan, or even other
[Guest]: kinds of regional crises are invariably going to shape by sort of the wider global context.
[Guest]: So I think even as we are trying to make sense of some of our current things, it is always
[Guest]: useful to bring that frame into mind while we are sort of trying to figure out, you know,
[Amit Varma]: where things are going today.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for your time and your wise words, Srinath.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks for coming on the show.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks for having me.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, head on over to your nearest bookstore online
[Amit Varma]: or offline and pick up Srinath Raghavan's fantastic book, 1971, a global history of
[Amit Varma]: the creation of Bangladesh.
[Amit Varma]: Unputdownable.
[Amit Varma]: You'll read it in one session.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow Srinath on Twitter at Srinath Raghava 3.
[Amit Varma]: At Srinath Raghava 3, that's his name only instead of the last letter, there's an N.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me on Twitter at Amitvarma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: And you can browse past episodes of the Seen and the Unseen on seenunseen.in and thinkpragati.com.
[Unknown]: Thank you for listening.
[Unknown]: and
[Unknown]: country. Yes, talking about everything from their startup challenges to what
[Unknown]: they're building and all the future of technology right here. So catch us on
[Unknown]: the IVM Podcast website, app, or wherever you listen to your podcasts from.